{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD17853", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "1/5/2006 9:01", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 000140  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART UPDATE ON INFORMATION MANAGEMENT OF RELIEF EFFORT  REF: 05 Islamabad 17853  ------- Summary -------  1. Effective information management, implemented from the earliest stages of a natural disaster, can improve the quality of the humanitarian response.  In the Pakistan earthquake, the UN introduced the cluster system without providing supporting documentation or comprehensive terms of reference and without internal information management capacity.  The UN clusters did not prioritize data collection and information management, and disaster specific information strategies were not implemented by UN agencies immediately following the disaster.  Information management at the cluster level remains an ongoing problem, and the UN's Humanitarian Information Center (HIC), which is responsible for providing technical advice and promoting data collection standards for the humanitarian community, currently does not have the staff or resources to assist. To strengthen the HIC and more effectively guide cluster- level management of information vital to relief and reconstruction efforts, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) recommends that donors, including USAID, provide two liaison officers and a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) specialist in the HIC specifically to work with the clusters.  End summary.  ------------------------------------ Importance of Information Management ------------------------------------  2. Effective information management during disasters is achieved by understanding what information decision-makers need in order to effectively steer the emergency response. The process begins with analysis: what do we need to know, how often do we need to know it, how can this information be made operational, who is responsible for the data management, what products will be produced, to whom will it be reported, what format will we use to collect the data, who will do the data collection, where will it be done, and what kind of training will we provide to support this process?  A critical step to managing information effectively is to prioritize the process early in a disaster so information management becomes an effective tool to support decision-making throughout the response. Lastly, information management strategies should be developed in advance of disasters and then modified to fit the circumstances of the disaster rather than being developed during the course of the disaster.  3. One essential component of information management, particularly in a disaster, is geo-referenced data used to build maps that make sense of a chaotic situation.  To determine gaps in coverage, it is essential to understand which geographical areas are covered and by which humanitarian agencies.  The Pakistan earthquake response demonstrated the importance for geo-referenced data; the lack of spatial coordinates for critical locations has hampered the response.  Less than half of the 300 known displaced person camps (spontaneous and planned) are geo- referenced.  As a result, the humanitarian community does not have a standard list of the exact locations of each camp.  In a recent shelter survey of 3,000 locations conducted by the International Organization for Migration (IOM), which is the head of the Emergency Shelter Cluster, surveyors did not collect coordinates, making it difficult to independently verify the results.  --------------------------------------------- -- Agencies and Organizations Managing Information --------------------------------------------- --  4. Presently, several agencies are primarily involved with information management in the Pakistan Earthquake response:  a) The UN Humanitarian Information Center (HIC) - The HIC is a common service to the humanitarian community and provides orientation products including contact lists and meeting schedules as well as map products.   The HIC initiated and continues to host weekly meetings for GIS users and information managers to coordinate efforts and prevent duplication of efforts.  During this disaster, the HIC has been unfairly blamed for not providing information management for the Clusters.  However, although the HIC has the responsibility for providing technical advice and promotion of standards for the humanitarian community to help them manage data and information more effectively, it is not responsible for data collection and internal information management within the clusters.  That is the responsibility of the UN cluster heads.  b) UN Cluster Heads - As reported reftel, the UN Cluster system was introduced in Pakistan without first establishing internal information management support in the clusters.  As a result, many clusters failed to establish an effective data collection system for information management within the cluster.  When it became increasingly apparent that information was needed for decision making, the clusters initiated several uncoordinated and competing requests for data several weeks after the earthquake.  Some hubs developed their reporting independently using non- standardized data collection forms-a situation that hindered uniform information analysis of all hub data.  c) The UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) - UNJLC is a common service frequently co-located with the HIC.  In Pakistan, the HIC and UNJLC were not co-located, but had strong collaboration, particularly among GIS staff.  UNJLC works on pipeline data and provides logical support to the humanitarian community.  d) ACTED - A USAID-funded international NGO, ACTED set up and managed an information management and GIS system that was exemplary in its effectiveness.  ACTED has used information management as part of their operations for several years.  For the Pakistan earthquake, they were able to bring information management staff from existing operations in Afghanistan and Tajikistan.  e) US Military - The US Military Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) information managers and GIS specialists coordinate with the USAID/DART and the humanitarian community and attend weekly meetings held at the HIC.  The DAC has made a commendable effort to reconcile data and share unclassified products; unclassified information has been essential since it is more accessible to a wider audience.  f) USAID/DART - The USAID/DART GIS Coordinator, from the U.S. Department of State's Humanitarian Information Unit, worked in an advisory role with the HIC, represented the USAID/DART at information management meetings, and met with implementing partners to address information management and other issues.  The USAID/DART collected standardized data on partner location, activities, coverage of assessed shelter and emergency relief item needs, commodities in the pipeline and materials distributed.  The international NGOs were extremely helpful in these exercises.  Data was shared with the HIC and UNJLC.  h) The GOP Federal Relief Commission (FRC) - The FRC hired an information management consulting firm to install an operations center at the Prime Minister's Secretariat and to provide guidance in information management.  Although the operations center was completed, FRC indicated they did not have funding to staff the center.  During meetings at the FRC, the humanitarian community provided data and information to the FRC and requested information from the Pakistani military on their relief activities.  The FRC was unable to provide this, at least partly due to the fact that each of the three battalions working in the response use different non-standardized reporting formats.  Although the HIC made a strong effort to resolve this problem, only summary information has been received from the FRC to date.  ------------------------------------------ Information Management Gaps and Shortfalls ------------------------------------------  5. In early December, the head of the Emergency Shelter Cluster suggested the creation of a Strategic Information Cell (SIC) in the HIC to achieve closer integration of data collection and management.  It was proposed that FRC, UNJLC, and the Emergency Shelter Cluster provide staff. However, the SIC concept was abandoned by the Emergency Shelter Cluster head after three weeks of discussion.  6. Several agencies are working to identify and analyze gaps in the shelter and emergency relief item pipeline.  On November 26, the FRC issued a report that provided some information regarding the total amount of relief commodities distributed thus far.  The report did not, however, provide information on what commodities were available or needed.  7. On December 10, UNJLC asked donors to share emergency relief item data from their NGOs in order to determine the amount of emergency relief items in-country and in the pipeline.  The request did not provide a standardized reporting format so the information returned required tremendous effort to consolidate.  UNJLC entered all of the information in a Logistics Support Software (LSS) database to enable analysis.  At present, the data entry process is still ongoing and by the time it is completed, the information will be dated.  Additionally, accuracy of UNJLC's tracking is an issue as UNJLC relies on humanitarian agencies to supply and update commodity information.  As UNJLC has not yet instituted a standardized reporting format, it is likely that they will continue to receive non-standardized data. 8. Poor information management leads to multiple and non- coordinated requests that fall heavily on the international NGOs.  Many have complained that it is increasingly burdensome to try to meet the multiple information requests from hubs, clusters, donors, and offices such as HIC and UNJLC.  --------------- Recommendations ---------------  9. There continue to be urgent information management needs to effectively manage the humanitarian relief operation through the winter.  If not addressed, the lack of effective management systems and geo-referenced data will also negatively impact the transition from relief to reconstruction.  At present, there are no information management officers at the HIC to liaise between the clusters and the HIC.  Based on respective expertise, the USAID/DART recommends that USAID provide a GIS specialist and the UK's Department for International Development (DFID) provide two liaison officers to the HIC to work with the clusters to improve information management and provide timely processing of data.  The USAID/DART has begun to discuss this idea with DFID representatives in Islamabad.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD17853", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "1/5/2006 9:21", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 000143  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PREL, PK, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART UPDATE ON INFORMATION MANAGEMENT OF RELIEF EFFORT  REF: 05 Islamabad 17853  ------- Summary -------  1. Effective information management, implemented from the earliest stages of a natural disaster, can improve the quality of the humanitarian response.  In the Pakistan earthquake, the UN introduced the cluster system without providing supporting documentation or comprehensive terms of reference and without internal information management capacity.  The UN clusters did not prioritize data collection and information management, and disaster specific information strategies were not implemented by UN agencies immediately following the disaster.  Information management at the cluster level remains an ongoing problem, and the UN's Humanitarian Information Center (HIC), which is responsible for providing technical advice and promoting data collection standards for the humanitarian community, currently does not have the staff or resources to assist. To strengthen the HIC and more effectively guide cluster- level management of information vital to relief and reconstruction efforts, the USAID Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) recommends that donors, including USAID, provide two liaison officers and a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) specialist in the HIC specifically to work with the clusters.  End summary.  ------------------------------------ Importance of Information Management ------------------------------------  2. Effective information management during disasters is achieved by understanding what information decision-makers need in order to effectively steer the emergency response. The process begins with analysis: what do we need to know, how often do we need to know it, how can this information be made operational, who is responsible for the data management, what products will be produced, to whom will it be reported, what format will we use to collect the data, who will do the data collection, where will it be done, and what kind of training will we provide to support this process?  A critical step to managing information effectively is to prioritize the process early in a disaster so information management becomes an effective tool to support decision-making throughout the response. Lastly, information management strategies should be developed in advance of disasters and then modified to fit the circumstances of the disaster rather than being developed during the course of the disaster.  3. One essential component of information management, particularly in a disaster, is geo-referenced data used to build maps that make sense of a chaotic situation.  To determine gaps in coverage, it is essential to understand which geographical areas are covered and by which humanitarian agencies.  The Pakistan earthquake response demonstrated the importance for geo-referenced data; the lack of spatial coordinates for critical locations has hampered the response.  Less than half of the 300 known displaced person camps (spontaneous and planned) are geo- referenced.  As a result, the humanitarian community does not have a standard list of the exact locations of each camp.  In a recent shelter survey of 3,000 locations conducted by the International Organization for Migration (IOM), which is the head of the Emergency Shelter Cluster, surveyors did not collect coordinates, making it difficult to independently verify the results.  --------------------------------------------- -- Agencies and Organizations Managing Information --------------------------------------------- --  4. Presently, several agencies are primarily involved with information management in the Pakistan Earthquake response:  a) The UN Humanitarian Information Center (HIC) - The HIC is a common service to the humanitarian community and provides orientation products including contact lists and meeting schedules as well as map products.   The HIC initiated and continues to host weekly meetings for GIS users and information managers to coordinate efforts and prevent duplication of efforts.  During this disaster, the HIC has been unfairly blamed for not providing information management for the Clusters.  However, although the HIC has the responsibility for providing technical advice and promotion of standards for the humanitarian community to help them manage data and information more effectively, it is not responsible for data collection and internal information management within the clusters.  That is the responsibility of the UN cluster heads.  b) UN Cluster Heads - As reported reftel, the UN Cluster system was introduced in Pakistan without first establishing internal information management support in the clusters.  As a result, many clusters failed to establish an effective data collection system for information management within the cluster.  When it became increasingly apparent that information was needed for decision making, the clusters initiated several uncoordinated and competing requests for data several weeks after the earthquake.  Some hubs developed their reporting independently using non- standardized data collection forms-a situation that hindered uniform information analysis of all hub data.  c) The UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) - UNJLC is a common service frequently co-located with the HIC.  In Pakistan, the HIC and UNJLC were not co-located, but had strong collaboration, particularly among GIS staff.  UNJLC works on pipeline data and provides logical support to the humanitarian community.  d) ACTED - A USAID-funded international NGO, ACTED set up and managed an information management and GIS system that was exemplary in its effectiveness.  ACTED has used information management as part of their operations for several years.  For the Pakistan earthquake, they were able to bring information management staff from existing operations in Afghanistan and Tajikistan.  e) US Military - The US Military Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) information managers and GIS specialists coordinate with the USAID/DART and the humanitarian community and attend weekly meetings held at the HIC.  The DAC has made a commendable effort to reconcile data and share unclassified products; unclassified information has been essential since it is more accessible to a wider audience.  f) USAID/DART - The USAID/DART GIS Coordinator, from the U.S. Department of State's Humanitarian Information Unit, worked in an advisory role with the HIC, represented the USAID/DART at information management meetings, and met with implementing partners to address information management and other issues.  The USAID/DART collected standardized data on partner location, activities, coverage of assessed shelter and emergency relief item needs, commodities in the pipeline and materials distributed.  The international NGOs were extremely helpful in these exercises.  Data was shared with the HIC and UNJLC.  h) The GOP Federal Relief Commission (FRC) - The FRC hired an information management consulting firm to install an operations center at the Prime Minister's Secretariat and to provide guidance in information management.  Although the operations center was completed, FRC indicated they did not have funding to staff the center.  During meetings at the FRC, the humanitarian community provided data and information to the FRC and requested information from the Pakistani military on their relief activities.  The FRC was unable to provide this, at least partly due to the fact that each of the three battalions working in the response use different non-standardized reporting formats.  Although the HIC made a strong effort to resolve this problem, only summary information has been received from the FRC to date.  ------------------------------------------ Information Management Gaps and Shortfalls ------------------------------------------  5. In early December, the head of the Emergency Shelter Cluster suggested the creation of a Strategic Information Cell (SIC) in the HIC to achieve closer integration of data collection and management.  It was proposed that FRC, UNJLC, and the Emergency Shelter Cluster provide staff. However, the SIC concept was abandoned by the Emergency Shelter Cluster head after three weeks of discussion.  6. Several agencies are working to identify and analyze gaps in the shelter and emergency relief item pipeline.  On November 26, the FRC issued a report that provided some information regarding the total amount of relief commodities distributed thus far.  The report did not, however, provide information on what commodities were available or needed.  7. On December 10, UNJLC asked donors to share emergency relief item data from their NGOs in order to determine the amount of emergency relief items in-country and in the pipeline.  The request did not provide a standardized reporting format so the information returned required tremendous effort to consolidate.  UNJLC entered all of the information in a Logistics Support Software (LSS) database to enable analysis.  At present, the data entry process is still ongoing and by the time it is completed, the information will be dated.  Additionally, accuracy of UNJLC's tracking is an issue as UNJLC relies on humanitarian agencies to supply and update commodity information.  As UNJLC has not yet instituted a standardized reporting format, it is likely that they will continue to receive non-standardized data. 8. Poor information management leads to multiple and non- coordinated requests that fall heavily on the international NGOs.  Many have complained that it is increasingly burdensome to try to meet the multiple information requests from hubs, clusters, donors, and offices such as HIC and UNJLC.  --------------- Recommendations ---------------  9. There continue to be urgent information management needs to effectively manage the humanitarian relief operation through the winter.  If not addressed, the lack of effective management systems and geo-referenced data will also negatively impact the transition from relief to reconstruction.  At present, there are no information management officers at the HIC to liaise between the clusters and the HIC.  Based on respective expertise, the USAID/DART recommends that USAID provide a GIS specialist and the UK's Department for International Development (DFID) provide two liaison officers to the HIC to work with the clusters to improve information management and provide timely processing of data.  The USAID/DART has begun to discuss this idea with DFID representatives in Islamabad.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "1/5/2006 9:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000147  SIPDIS  STATE ALSO PASS TO USAID USAID/W FOR A/AID ANDREW NATSIOS, JBRAUSE DCHA/OFDA GGOTTLIEB, MMARX, RTHAYER, BDEEMER AID/W FOR DCHA/OFDA SOUTH ASIA RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TEAM SOUTH ASIA EARTHQUAKE TASK FORCE DCHA/FFP FOR JONATHAN DWORKEN ANE DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR MARK WARD BANGKOK FOR OFDA SENIOR REGIONAL ADVISOR TOM DOLAN KATHMANDU FOR OFDA REGIONAL ADVISOR WILLIAM BERGER ROME PASS FODAG GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH NSC FOR JMELINE EUCOM FOR POLA/J3/J4/J5 BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER NEW YORK FOR TMALY SECDEF FOR SOLIC/PKHA, USDP/J3 JOINT STAFF WASH DC FOR J3/J4/J5 HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE FOR J3/J5  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, AEMR, ASEC, MASS, ECON, KMDR, KPAO, OIIP, OPRC, PGOV, PRE, Earthquake SUBJECT: PAKISTAN - EARTHQUAKE: USAID/DART UPDATE ON INFORMATION MANA  REF: 05 Islamabad 17853  ------- Summary -------  1. Effective information management, implemented from the earliest st  ------------------------------------ Importance of Information Management ------------------------------------  2. Effective information management during disasters is achieved by u  3. One essential component of information management, particularly in  --------------------------------------------- -- Agencies and Organizations Managing Information --------------------------------------------- --  4. Presently, several agencies are primarily involved with informatio  a) The UN Humanitarian Information Center (HIC) - The HIC is a common  b) UN Cluster Heads - As reported reftel, the UN Cluster system was i  c) The UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC) - UNJLC is a common service  d) ACTED - A USAID-funded international NGO, ACTED set up and managed  e) US Military - The US Military Disaster Assistance Center (DAC) inf  f) USAID/DART - The USAID/DART GIS Coordinator, from the U.S. Departm  h) The GOP Federal Relief Commission (FRC) - The FRC hired an informa  ------------------------------------------ Information Management Gaps and Shortfalls ------------------------------------------  5. In early December, the head of the Emergency Shelter Cluster sugge  6. Several agencies are working to identify and analyze gaps in the s  7. On December 10, UNJLC asked donors to share emergency relief item  8. Poor information management leads to multiple and non-coordinated  --------------- Recommendations ---------------  9. There continue to be urgent information management needs to effect  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE24367", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/22/2006 12:08", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 003117  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPT FOR EB/ESC/TFS; S/CT; TREASURY FOR A/S JANICE GARDNER, ROBERT WARNER, PATRICK HEFFERNAN; NSC FOR TODD HINNEN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2020 TAGS: EFIN, CVIS, ETTC, KTFN, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE: VIEW ON POTENTIAL DESIGNATIONS OF PROMINENT INCITERS  REF: STATE 24367  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (S/NF) Post welcomes intiative described reftel to target prominent inciters of terrorist acts.  Should these test cases prove successful, we believe that a number of individuals from terrorist and militant organizations in Pakistan would make appropriate targets for future consideration.  Post looks forward to consultation with Department on derivation of other possible designees under this provision.  2. (S/NF) While Muhammad Adil Khan is not/not one of the senior Harakatul Mujahidden or Harakat-ul-Jihad-i-Islami leaders, we believe that he continues to play a critical role for these (and possibly other terrorist/militant organizations) as a fundraiser and recruiter.  Sufficiently strong ties (reftel) clearly exist for his designation as a prominent inciter of terrorism.  Post does not believe that the GOP would have any strong objections to Adil Khan's designation per se.  Both HUM and HUJI are banned by the GOP and operatives from each were detained as part of Musharraf's crackdown on extremist organizations.  The GOP may, however, object to the overall notion of designating prominent inciters.  It has historically pressed for relatively narrow parameters for designation (likely hoping to keep some prominent Kashmiri groups and individuals from the lists). We have no reason to believe that designation would unduly raise Adil Khan's prominence.  His publicized deportation from the United States has already made him a well-known figure in extremist circles, and we do not believe designation would increase his following.  3. (S/NF) It is unclear what specific impact the solitary designation of Adil Khan would have on either HUJI or HUM operations.  Adil Khan's activities on behalf of these organizations are already theoretically banned under Pakistani law.  Most fundraising operations are conducted in cash and would not be easily traceable by law enforcement for seizure.  In addition, we are uncertain that the GOP would aggressively pursue Adil Khan's personal assets, and we have no evidence that he has significant seizable assets in other countries.  For this reason, we would strongly urge that this designation go forward only as the first in a series of sanctions against HUM and HUJI officials designed to maintain pressure on these organizations. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE7148", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/24/2006 6:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003195  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2016 TAGS: KAWC, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP WILLING TO ACCEPT RETURN OF PAK GITMO DETAINEE ABDUL HALIM SADIQ  REF: STATE 7148  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  (C) On February 18, the GOP Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the Embassy by Note Verbale of its willingness to accept the return of Pakistani Gitmo detainee Abdul Haleem Sadiq (reftel) . Full text of note follows:  \"No. USA-2/16/2006   18th February 2006  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America and with reference to the Embassy's non-paper  handed over to Director (Americas) by Political Counsellor of U.S. Embassy on 25th January 2006, regarding the release of a Pakistan national Mr. Abdul Halim Sadiq detained at Guantanamo Bay has the honor to state that the Government of Pakistan is willing to accept the individual for return to Pakistan and undertake to treat him humanely and in a manner consistent with laws and obligations of Pakistan and if any individual is detained after his return, the intelligence gained about the activities of the individual, if significant, could be shared.  The Ministry avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy the assurances of its highest consideration. End Text.\" CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE28802", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/24/2006 11:44", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003208  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2015 TAGS: IZ, KDEM, KPAO, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER, PAS SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF CONDEMNS AL-ASKARIYA SHRINE BOMBING  REF: STATE 28802  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On February 23, 2006, per reftel instruction, PolCounselor contacted MFA Spokesperson Tasneem Aslam and MFA Americas Director General Sohail Mehmood to urge the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to issue a statement condemning the bombing of the al-Askariya Shrine.  He also shared with the MFA the text of President Bush's statement and the joint statement by Ambassador Khalilizad and General Casey.  2.  (U)  On February 24, 2006, the MFA issues a press release with the text of a letter from President Musharraf to President Talabani condemning the bombing (full text of press release follows).  (Begin text.)  P.R. No. 74/2006 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Office of the Spokesperson)  PRESS RELEASE  The President has sent the following message to the President of the Republic of Iraq on the bombing of the Holy Shrine of Imam Ali al-Hadi, and the resulting violence in the country.  QUOTE  Message from the President  Excellency,  On behalf of the Government and people of Pakistan, I convey our deep shock and condemnation of the bombing of the Holy Shrine of Imam Ali al-Hadi resulting in its severe damage.  We are gravely concerned at the ensuing communal strife in which scores of mosques have been attacked, and which has claimed over one hundred lives. We sincerely hope that the spiralling tension and hostility is soon brought under control and calm is restored.  I avail of this opportunity to convey our prayers for the peace and prosperity of the brotherly people of Iraq.  Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.  (General Pervez Musharraf) President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  H.E. Jalal Talabani President of the Republic of Iraq  UNQUOTE  Islamabad February 24, 2006  (End text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/25/2006 8:01", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 003253  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: POST CLEARANCE FOR GAUTAM RANA  1.  Post welcomes and grants post clearance for the visit of Gautam Rana for February 27, 2006.  The purpose of the visit is to attend the Avian Flu town hall meeting.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Mohammed Motiwala. He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Fax: 92-51-208-2537; Cell: 0300-201-2202.  3.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  4. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  5.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  6.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  7.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled  ISLAMABAD 00003253  002 OF 004   departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  8.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  9.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  10. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  ISLAMABAD 00003253  003 OF 004    Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after  ISLAMABAD 00003253  004 OF 004   dark.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "05ISLAMABAD19203|06STATE9629", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/27/2006 8:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003318  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2016 TAGS: MARR. MOPS, PREL, KTIA, PK SUBJECT: AGREEMENT WITH PAKISTAN ON STATUS OF FORCES - PROPOSED FINAL TEXT  REF: A. STATE 9629      B. 2005 ISLAMABAD 19203 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: AMB:RCROCKER Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (U)  On February 23, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) transmitted its proposed final text for a Status of Forces Agreement, based on the U.S. text in ref A.  The only change to the U.S. text is in para 10, where the U.S. draft stated that: \" The mutually agreed duration  of this agreement is 90 days, extendable by mutual written consent...\"  The Pakistani version reads:  \"The duration of this agreement will be valid until 15 April 2006, unless extended through mutual agreement by both the countries.\" (As currently planned, the last U.S. elements associated with the relief operation will depart Pakistan o/a April 15.)  If the Department finds this change acceptable, please advise regarding language Embassy should use in \"affirmative note in reply\" referenced in Agreement.  2. (C)  Begin text of Note No. USA-2/59/05 from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Islamabad:  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents it compliments to the Embassy of the United States in Pakistan and, with reference to the Embassy's Note No. 2245 of 19 October 2005, has the honour to propose following agreement between the two governments regarding the status of United States personnel (defined as U.S. military personnel and civilian personnel of the United States Department of Defense) who are present in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for providing earthquake relief assistance.  1.  The Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan will have the overall direction, organization and coordination of the earthquake relief assistance operation, which the United States is supporting.  2. United States personnel will respect the laws of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the customs and traditions of its people, and will abstain from any activity inconsistent with the laws of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the customs and the traditions of its people, and the object and purposes of the present agreement.  3.  The Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan will take all reasonable measures to ensure the safety and security of United States personnel and their property when present in the territory of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  4.  The provisions of the Geneva Convention on Diplomatic Relations of April 18, 1961 regarding administrative and technical staff assigned to the mission shall apply mutatis mutandis to United States personnel involved in the relief assistance operation.  5.  The Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the Government of the United States of America shall waive any claims they may have against each other for injury, including injury resulting in death, suffered by their military and civilian personnel of their respective militaries and damage to or loss of property owned by them, caused unintentionally by the acts or omissions of the other or the military and civilian personnel of their respective militaries in the performance of official duties in connection with the relief assistance operation.  Claims for damages or injury alleged to have been caused by the United States personnel to any third party shall be transmitted through the governmental Pakistani authorities to the designated U.S. representative.  6.  United States personnel shall be permitted to enter, stay and exit the territory of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan with passports/U.S. government-issued identification cards and individual or collective movement orders, to be shown to the Pakistani authorities on arrival and on which basis special visas shall be issued to them at points of entry/exit for the duration of the relief assistance operation.  Group movements outside the relief assistance zone designated by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan will be coordinated the relevant Pakistani authorities.  7.  United States personnel will not generally carry any arms.  However, with mutual consultation, Pakistani authorities will permit the carriage of personal small arms for security.  The personal small arms shall be imported in sealed containers and stored on site in sealed containers.   8.  The Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan shall exempt from registration, customs duties, and all taxes, directly or indirectly associated with the importation, utilization and exportation of all products, property, vehicles, material, goods, cargo, and equipment imported into or acquired in Pakistan by or for the US Government in connection with the relief assistance operation.  All such items will be declared in writing at point of entry into Pakistan, and on exit from Pakistan.  9.  Any issue that is not covered by the proposed Agreement will be considered constructively in the light of the cooperative efforts of the Republic of Pakistan and the United States of America in the relief assistance operation  and customary principles of international law related to international humanitarian relief.  10.  The duration of this agreement will be valid until 15 April 2006, unless extended through mutual agreement by both the countries.  If the text set forth herein is acceptable to the Government of the United States of America, this Note and the Embassy's affirmative note in reply shall constitute an agreement between the two Governments which shall enter into force on the date of the Embassy's note.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs takes this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its highest consideration.  End Text  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/3/2006 2:00", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 003542  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/02/2016 TAGS: AF, MARR, MASS, MCAP, MOPS, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: 15TH PAKISTAN-AFGHANISTAN-U.S. TRIPARTITE MEETING  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C) Summary: The 15th U.S.-Afghanistan-Pakistan Tripartite Commission meeting, held at Bagram on February 25, was characterized by frank discussion between the Afghan and Pakistani delegations.  The agenda focused on cross-border issues, intelligence sharing, steps to counter IEDs, and the link between enhancing security, governance and reconstruction.  Participants noted that the open discussion was a sign of the usefulness of the Tripartite Commission and of growing comfort levels between Pakistani and Afghan counterparts, but both delegations emphasized the need to cultivate trust as the key enabler for continued progress. (Contrary to press reports, the Pakistanis did not cite the Bajaur incident, though their allusion to \"increased border violations\" was clearly a reference to the incident.  The U.S. response \"noted\" Pakistan's concerns, while emphasizing the need to take effective measures to counter the threat posed by the common enemy.)  End summary.  2. (C) On February 25, Afghan, Pakistani and U.S. military representatives met at Bagram for the 15th Tripartite Commission meeting.  The Pakistani delegation was led by Major General Yousef, Director General of Military Operations, and the Afghan delegation by ANA Chief of Operations Lieutenant General Karimi.  The U.S. delegation was led by CFC-A Commander Lieutenant General Eikenberry. The NATO-ISAF observer was Brigadier General Tabor, Special Advisor to the NATO-ISAF Commander.  Khowst officials, including the Governor and his provincial police chief, the RC East Commander, the Khowst PRT Commander, and PRT civilian representatives from State and USAID participated via a VTC link.  Presentations were made by the Chairs of the Border Security Sub-committee, the Counter-IED Working Group, and the Military Intelligence Sharing Working Group.  3. (C) The focus of the 15th tripartite was civil-military affairs, including enhanced military-military cooperation and the importance of improving security through reconstruction and governance on both sides of the border.  Briefing topics included a US presentation on how PRTs function, and a following briefing focused specifically on Khowst province, with a range of Khowst officials offering their insights on civil/military cooperation.  The Pakistan delegation provided an in-depth briefing on its three-tiered (military-political-development) strategy in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).  Beyond civ/mil issues, the delegations had in-depth discussions on ways to enhance intelligence sharing and to deepen cooperation on combating IEDs.  The NATO observer briefed on NATO transition in Afghanistan.  Countering IEDs ---------------  4. (S) Discussions began with a substantive exchange on strategies to counter the growing threat of IEDs.  It was agreed that a common database of the types of IEDs used/found should be developed.  Both sides underscored the need for improved intelligence sharing in creating this database.  The Pakistani side pointed out that a lack of technical capability in protecting forces against IEDs weakens Pakistan's ability to manage the growing use of IEDs.  Afghan representatives noted that as the majority of casualties from IEDs are civilians, engaging border area inhabitants on both sides through a public information campaign to teach civilians to identify an IED and to notify authorities would be useful.  The session ended with LTG Eikenberry emphasis on the need to attack all nodes of the IED employment and attack cycle by aligning counter-IED efforts into a comprehensive framework that incorporates intelligence, public engagement and information, attack against IED cells, TTP (tactics, techniques, and procedures), force protection, and exploitation. Pointing to an example of the relationship  ISLAMABAD 00003542  002 OF 003   between security and development (the theme of the talks), LTG Eikenberry noted that in Konar Province, the paving of a stretch of road had dramatically reduced the volume of IED attacks.  Intelligence Sharing --------------------  5. (S) After a briefing on the last meeting of the Military Intelligence Sharing Working Group, Pakistani Director of Military Intelligence, Brigadier General Reza Muhammad, stated that intelligence that was neither timely nor actionable, no matter how well-shared, was akin to having a \"doctor after death.\"  The Afghan side responded that they often provide actionable intelligence -- especially regarding the location of Taliban and Al Qaeda in Pakistani territory and the use of madrassas as recruitment centers -- but they rarely see results.  Both sides emphasized the need for greater intelligence sharing at the tactical level and faster response times to take maximum advantage of opportunities for action against insurgents or drug traffickers.  Continued Cross-Border Violations ---------------------------------  6. (S) Pakistani and Afghan delegations discussed continued cross-border movement )- in both directions -- of insurgents, arms, and drugs. The Pakistani delegation cited cases of Afghan weapons smuggled into Balochistan and the flow of \"miscreants\" from Afghanistan into Pakistan.  The Afghan side noted examples of Pakistani citizens in Afghanistan caught planning suicide bombings in Kandahar and Taliban insurgents arrested entering Afghanistan.  Pakistani officials responded with assurances that the over 80,000 Pakistani soldiers in the frontier tribal areas were prepared to respond to useful intelligence passed to them, and that Pakistani forces are tightening border passage to Afghanistan.  With scanners and passports, cross border movement could be even more restricted.  The Pakistani delegation also noted an increase in border violations by Coalition Forces since the last Tripartite meeting in December.  (Note: Contrary to press reports, the Bajaur incident was not specifically mentioned, though this was likely the intended reference.  The US response was to &note, Pakistan's complaint while emphasizing the need to take effective measures to counter the threat posed by the common enemy.)  Building Security Through Reconstruction ----------------------------------------  7. (C) All participants agreed that reconstruction and economic and political development are crucial to improving security in the border areas.  Pakistani Director of Military Operations, Brigadier General Nasser Janjua, presented a comprehensive Pakistan strategy for improving security in the FATA through military,  political and development means.  The CFC-A Regional Command ) East Commander, Colonel Pat Donahue the Governor of Khowst, Merajoddin Pathan, and the Khowst PRT Commander Lieutenant Colonel Sammons presented a similar three-pronged strategy for improving security and enhancing development in that province.  LTG Eikenberry noted the similarities of these strategies and encouraged greater Pakistani-Afghan coordination and collaboration in these efforts to improve conditions on both sides of the border, pointing out that tribes and clans span both sides of a common border, thus necessitating a common strategy. LTG Eikenberry's Wrap-Up and Proposals --------------------------------------  8. (S) LTG Eikenberry closed the meeting with three proposals for the Pakistan delegation (already vetted and approved by the ANA delegation).  He announced that CJTF-76 is presently planning \"Operation Mountain Lion\", a coordinated Afghan-CFC  ISLAMABAD 00003542  003 OF 003   spring offensive against the Taliban.  He suggested that the Pakistan Army be included in aspects of the operational planning with the aim of achieving common effects on both sides of the border. The second proposal was that the Tripartite's successful Border Security Subcommittee be expanded to RC South starting in April and include participation by the Canadian RC South Multi-National Brigade Commander.  The Pakistani side welcomed this idea, but indicated on the margins of the meeting that it is unsure if the counterpart would be the Frontier Corps or 12th Corps, pointing out that unlike 11th Corps stationed in Peshawar, 12th Corps was not deployed along the Afghan-Pakistan border.  They will consider options and re-engage.  LTG Eikenberry's third proposal was that NATO representation at the April tripartite in Pakistan be upgraded and that NATO become a full Tripartite member in June, sharing  the third leg of the Tripartite with CFC -) in the run up to NATO Stage three transition in the South later in the summer and stage four thereafter.  These proposals met with approval in principle, with details to be worked out. Both delegations concurred with the CFC proposal to backbrief the results of the mid-March AFG-PAK Mil seminar at the Marshall center in Germany on common security issues -) the first in a series of planned conferences aimed at developing common perspectives on security and nurturing personal and professional relationships among Pakistani and Afghan officers at the 05 and 06 (Lt Col and colonel) levels.  Two dates were suggested for the next Tripartite Commission meeting (a 4-star event)in Islamabad: April 11-13 or April 18-20.  Comments --------  9. (S) The 15th Tripartite Commission meeting highlighted the Afghans' frustration over continued IED and suicide attacks in Afghanistan, and their conviction that Pakistan could do more.  Though LTG Karimi did his best to reframe their observations in diplomatic terms, his DGMI and the Governor of Khowst delivered tough messages.  The Pakistanis responded by defending their efforts and going on the offensive, challenging the Afghans to do more to combat gun-running into Balochistan and narcotics trafficking.  The discussion was frank but the tone was controlled throughout and the sides parted with embraces at end of the session.  More importantly, over the past months the concept of a common enemy has taken firm root in underpinning the need for these discussions.  Afghans and Pakistanis also recognize the fragility of the relationship, given the inherent lack of trust.  The problem of trust can be overcome to the extent exchanges like these generate action on each side, and also through tangible successes such as those produced by the Border Security Subcommittee and, prospectively, by cooperation in Operation Mountain Lion.  Still, improved military operational effectiveness must be achieved in the coming year or the Tripartite Talks will be seen by the Afghan side as without substance.  10. (S) Considerable progress is being made in setting the stage for expanded Coalition-Afghan-Pakistani military coordination across the Balochistan border (i.e. CFC-A Regional Command ) South, Afghan National Army 205th Corps, and either the Pakistan army's 12th Corps or the Frontier Corps), as well as for a seamless NATO-ISAF transition into the lead international military position in the Tripartite Talks.  This will be important for the Coalition and NATO, as well as key individual nations (UK, Canada, etc.) during the upcoming command changes in Afghanistan.  Offers to exchange liaison officers (LNOs) initiated outside of the Tripartite framework risk confusing Kabul and Islamabad, and undermining their confidence in the continuity and coherence of the process. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ABUDHABI605|06STATE34756", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/3/2006 13:17", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 003575  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2016 TAGS: PARM, PREL, ETTC, PK SUBJECT: SHIPMENT OF ALUMINUM ALLOW SHEETS AND RODS  REF: A. STATE 34756      B. ABU DHABI 605  Classified By: Classified by Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons: 1.4 (b), (C) and (D).  1.  (S) Ambassador delivered ref A talking points to Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan, who, in turn, discussed the issue with  SIPDIS the Prime Minister.  Based on this conversation, Khan subsequently informed the Ambassador that Pakistan was not in a position to touch the ship in Karachi.  2.  (S) Khan explained that in the current domestic environment, seizing the shipment would inflame Pakistan's Shia population. (Iran would see to it.)  Pakistan could not afford increased sectarian tension at this time.  3.  (S) Ambassador underscored the importance of seizing the shipment as an indicator of Pakistan's commitment to non-proliferation and its willingness to work with us on Iran and on illegally obtained products.  Khan said he understood and that Pakistan would understand anything the U.S. might do to intercept the shipment at sea, but that Pakistan could not take action itself in Pakistani waters.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/4/2006 2:51", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003576  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PHUM, PGOV, PTER SUBJECT: KARACHI BOMBING: CONDOLENCES AND CONDEMNATIONS POUR IN  1. Summary. Pakistani politicians at all levels--from President Musharraf and PM Aziz to a wide-spectrum of political party representatives--have reached out to US Embassy and Consulate officials to offer their condolences and express their condemnation of the 2 March bombing outside of the US Consulate General in Karachi. Reactions have been uniform, regretting the loss of lives, vehemently critical of the bomber's actions,  and simultaneously concerned about the bombing's impact on Pakistan's image abroad. End Summary.  REGRET, SORROW, AND ANGER FROM MOST POLITICAL PARTIES... --------------------------------------------- --------- 2. Publicly and privately, a spectrum of the Mission's political and civil society contacts have reached out to express their sincere grief over the death of Karachi Consulate personnel. Several called in to express \"sincere condolences\" and concern over the continuing \"menace\" of terrorism and sabotage on Pakistan's public image.  Others used the media to convey their condolences and their anger at those responsible for the attack. Thus far, condolence calls have come in from over 25 officials but there has been a notable absence from JI and PML-N thus far. A snapshot of callers includes:        --President Musharraf       --Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi, PML       --Punjab Governor Khalid Maqbool       --Makhdoom Amin Fahim, Chairperson of the PPP       --PML Secretary General Mushahid Hussain       --Riyaz Fatiyana, PML MNA       --Kashmala Tariq, PML MNA       --Mufti Abrar Ahmed, Private Secretary to Maulana Fazlur Rahman (Jamait-e Ulema-e Islam Fazlur Rehman Faction)       --Sahibzada Abdul Khair Muhammad Zubair, VP Jamait-e Ulema-e Pakistan       --Jalal Naqvi, Tehrik-e Islami Pakistan       --Inayat Ali Shakir, Tehrike Akhuwat-e Islami Pakistan (Shia)       --Mufti Munib-ur Rehman, President, Tanzeem-ul Madaris (Barelvi madrassa board)       --Mehboob Sada, Christian Studies Center       --Om Parkash Narain, Chairman, Pakistan Minorities Forum   ...AND CONCERN FOR PAKISTAN'S IMAGE ------------------------------------ 3. Government politicians and several civil society representatives also pointedly noted in their messages their concern that the bombings could further tarnish Pakistan's delicate image abroad or harm US-Pakistan relations. President Musharraf and PM Aziz both made a point of telling reporters that the \"sensless acts\" would not deter Pakistan's fight against terrorism and expressed concern that the terorists were \"defaming\" Pakistan's soft image.  PML Law and Justice Minister Wasi Zafar said that the bombing was intended to sabotage President Bush's visit to Pakistan, and told reporters that the bombing reinforced the fact that \"the menace of terrorism needs to be wiped out.\" Lastly, Sindh Chief Minister Ishrat-ul Abad and Governor Ghulam Arbab Rahim told reporters to \"tell the world that no Muslim considers terrorism a correct path.\" CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD3318|06STATE31970", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/7/2006 9:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003684  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/06/2016 TAGS: MARR, MOPS, PREL, KTIA, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN CONSIDERS NEW SOFA TO BE IN FORCE AS OF MARCH 2  REF: A. STATE 31970      B. ISLAMABAD 3318 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: AMB:RCROCKER, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (c)     1. (C) On March 2, poloff delivered to MFA Americas Desk Director Diyar Khan the diplomatic note (text ref A) confirming USG acceptance of the SOFA language in the earlier GOP note, reported ref B.  Director Khan confirmed to poloff on March 7 that the GOP has no objections to the USG note and considers that the SOFA has entered into force as of the receipt of our note on March 2.  The MFA has also forwarded the USG note to the Ministry of Defense.  2, (U) Per para 4 ref A, post is faxing a copy of its reply to L/PM and transmitting a certified copy of the final Embassy note and the original of the MFA note to L/T, as well as other notes as requested. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/7/2006 15:10", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 003705  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2016 TAGS: EFIN, PK, PREL, PTER, KTFN SUBJECT: POST REQUESTS TWO WEEK DELAY IN JUD DESIGNATION  REF: A. A. MAIER - QUINN EMAIL MAIL 06 MARCH 06      B. B. LAMBERT - ENGLEKEN EMAIL 21 FEB 06  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  After reviewing the time line presented in ref A and B for moving forward with the UN 1267 and domestic terrorism finance designation of Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) as an alter-ego of current terrorism finance designee Lashkar-e-Tayyba (LeT), Ambassador requests a two-week delay in pre-notificaion, presentation to the UN 1267 Committee and in the domestic designation.  Post's preferred timeline is:  -- pre-notification:  no earlier than 30 March -- request to UN 1267 Committee:  no earlier than 15 April -- domestic action:  no earlier than 15 April  2.  (S)  Post's reasoning for requesting this delay is based solely on force-protection considerations.  DAC-PAK personnel will continue flying helicopter sorties in North West Frontier Province (NWFP) and Pakistan-administered Kashmir (AJK) until the end of March; ground support personnel will be deployed in Muzaffarabad, AJK as long as the helicopters are flying.  By the end of the first week of April, U.S. military personnel will have redeployed from NWFP and AJK to the Islamabad area, awaiting onward tranport out of Pakistan.  In order not to increase the risk to our military personnel as they conclude their successful mission to Pakistan, post recommends that no action on the JuD designation be taken until all DAC-PAK operations have concluded and DAC personnel are in the Islamabad area. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE37316", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/8/2006 8:45", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003754  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR US GOVERNORS DELEGATION  REF: STATE 37316  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Gov. James Douglas, Gov. Kenny Guinn, Gov. Phil Bredesen, Gov. Tim Kaine, Maj. Gen. Summaral, Maj Patrick Lewis, Dan Wilmot, Claude Chafin and Ltc. John Schroeder for March 15 and 16. The purpose of the visit is to transit Pakistan.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Mohammed Motiwala. He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Cell: 0300-501-2202.  3.  The control officer will meet visitors upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad.  Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  4.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  5. Unless only transiting Pakistan, everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  6.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  7.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  8.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  9.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  10.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  11. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED). TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD3022", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/8/2006 13:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003804  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2021 TAGS: PGOV, KISL, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: CARTOONS FAIL TO UNITE OPPOSITION  REF: ISLAMABAD 3022 AND PREVIOUS  ISLAMABAD 00003804  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C) Summary:  For a brief moment, Pakistan's political opposition appeared poised to transform popular anger over the Danish cartoon issue into protests against the Musharraf government.  In the end, however, self-interest and government inducements have combined to split the divergent parties within the political opposition, diffuse the issue, and eliminate any potential threat to the sitting government.  The more moderate (and larger) secular and Islamist opposition parties, the Pakistan People's Party Parliamentarians (PPPP) and the Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) refused to participate in the street tactics being advocated by their counterparts.  Absent their participation, the Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) and Pakistan Muslim Leaque - Nawaz (PML-N) protest strategy appears unlikely to be losing momentum.  End Summary.  2. (C) With anger over the Danish cartoons running high, JI sought to direct this anger against the Musharraf government.  Through proxies and in concert with the local leadership of the PML-N, it was responsible for early (and sometimes violent) protests in which demands for Musharraf's immediate resignation were part and parcel of the uprising.  JI convinced a skeptical PPP and JUI-F to participate in combined and individual party protests in Islamabad and Peshawar (the latter turning violent) and to frame the issue as a movement against their common enemy Musharraf.  At the high point of such protests, JI leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed publicly promised that a street movement would oust Musharraf by March 23, Pakistan National Day.  JI ruling council member Shahid Pervez told poloff that the party's strategy was to create a security situation such that the military would have to intervene, oust Musharraf, and install a popular caretaker government led by the political parties in advance of the 2007 elections.  Large-scale, nationwide demonstrations to coincide with the President Bush's visit were the focal point of this strategy.  3. (C) The violence in Peshawar appears to have been the first breaking point within the opposition alliance. According to JUI-F Foreign Relations Committee Chair former Ambassador Mohammad Jalalud-Din, the JUI-F, which controls the NWFP provincial government and was an active proponent of the protests, appears to have been caught off-guard by the scale of the violence and the central government's and public's strong reaction against it.  This, he claims, caused the JUI-F to reassess its strategy of supporting JI's street tactics.  Jalalud-Din admitted that JUI-F's primary goal was to retain the government in NWFP and that subtle threats by the GOP had accompanied their urging of a JUI-F change in tactics.  In addition, Jalalud-Din expressed doubt that a \"security crisis\" would result in military intervention to impose a civilian government.  Martial law, in his view, was the more likely outcome.  4. (C) According to PPPP Chairman Makhdoom Amin Fahim, his party was never comfortable with the JI (and PML-N) protest strategy.  He stressed that the PPPP had purposely avoided participation in the Lahore demonstrations and had given only tacit support to the Islamabad demonstrations.  The party had organized its own protests in response to growing public condemnation of the cartoons and a need to burnish its \"Islamic\" credentials.  Fahim admitted, however, that the PPPP did not believe protests were the best way to achieve democratic change.  The PPPP ultimately broke with the JI on this issue after Benazir Bhutto personally instructed the party not to participate in protests against President Bush (septel).  Fahim claimed that the party would instead attempt negotiations with the GOP on a national unity government and/or necessary changes to ensure free and fair elections in 2007.  5. (C) Comment:  The Danish cartoon issue illustrates the  ISLAMABAD 00003804  002.2 OF 002   difficulties that the opposition faces in building a true anti-Musharraf coalition.  The smaller parties, JI and PML-N, believe that their interests lie in \"embarassing\" the Musharraf regime.  With little stake in the current structure and minimal possibility of a deal with the GOP, neither is concerned about negative government reaction to their tactics.  In contrast, the JUI-F (which holds the government in NWFP and is a coaltion partner in Balochistan) and the PPPP (which continues to believe that a deal with Musharraf is possible) are wary of undertaking any action that puts them too far at odds with Musharraf.  For these reasons, we believe that a united opposition anti-Musharraf coalition will continue to exist in name only for the foreseeable future, posing minimal threat to the sitting government. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE36300", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/8/2006 14:31", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 003807  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/08/2016 TAGS: KDEM, MARR, MASS, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: POLITICAL SCENESETTER FOR PM - A/S JOHN HILLEN  REF: STATE 36300  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (S) The U.S. Mission in Pakistan warmly welcomes your planned March 15 - 18 visit to Pakistan.  As demonstrated during President Bush's recent visit to Islamabad, both President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward Musharraf's goal of \"enlightened moderation.\"  They viewed the President's visit as a landmark in the relationship and were gratified that he decided stay overnight in Pakistan.  Your visit comes as Pakistan's leaders are trying to contain the fallout from the Danish cartoon controversy, while simultaneously suppressing violent separatists in Balochistan, combating al-Qa'ida and extremists in the Tribal Areas along the Afghan border and guiding earthquake recovery operations.  The government remains fully engaged in earthquake recovery operations, with attention turning from emergency relief toward long-term reconstruction.  Robust USG participation in the earthquake relief effort will help promote a more positive public perception of the United States in what has long been a tough public diplomacy environment, helping us advance key U.S. objectives, including democratization, regional stability and progress in the global war on terror.  The Cartoon Controversy -----------------------  2. (C) Over the past month, tens of thousands of Pakistani demonstrators have taken to the streets to protest the publication of the Danish cartoons.  Early rallies in Lahore and Peshawar were particularly destructive, with rampant looting and vandalism in parts of downtown Lahore and Peshawar and six protesters killed.  Although more demonstrations throughout Pakistan followed (including a widely-observed nationwide strike on the day of President Bush's arrival), enhanced security measures by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) has prevented any repetition of the unrestrained violence seen in February.  Over time, the protests have taken on a greater political tone.  The outrage against the Danes and the EU still festers, but opportunistic politicians have attempted to subvert public sentiment in order to condemn the West as a whole (including the U.S.) and to embarrass the Musharraf government.  3.  (C) Following President Bush's lead, your visit presents an opportunity to remind the Pakistani people that the United States understands the sentiments of the Muslim community and that, while we strongly support freedom of expression, we also believe the press should behave responsibly.  More broadly, it will be an opportunity to underscore our desire for warm relations with the Muslim world and a sustained partnership with Pakistan as it addresses the long-term challenges of development and the immediate challenge of earthquake recovery.  Earthquake Relief -----------------  4. (U) The October 8 earthquake (7.6 on the Richter scale) in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was the strongest to hit the region in over a century.  The GOP estimates that more than 73,000 individuals died in the quake, with more than 69,000 wounded and some 2.8 million survivors left homeless.  The United States has been Pakistan's most visible international partner in delivering emergency relief over the last two months.  5.  (U) The U.S. military has been on the ground since October 10.  At the peak of initial relief efforts, more than 1,200 personnel and 24 helicopters provided vital transport, logistics and medical and engineering support in affected areas.  As the emergency relief phase is coming to an end, we have closed the two U.S. military hospitals, turning over USD 2.5 million in medical equipment to Pakistani counterparts. Our Seabee unit has also departed Muzaffarabad, leaving behind 25 pieces of heavy construction equipment as a donation to Pakistani military engineering units.  U.S. airlift operations will be phased out in late March.  6.  (U) The U.S. military and USAID collaborated closely on the civilian relief effort, with the military providing logistics and USAID working with NGOs to deliver supplies and services in camps and villages.  USAID has provided more than USD 60 million in additional humanitarian assistance through NGOs and the United Nations, including blankets, tents, plastic sheeting and shelter kits to help the affected population make it through the harsh Himalayan winter.  USAID recently made its first reconstruction grant of USD 15  ISLAMABAD 00003807  002 OF 004   million to rebuild schools and hospitals.  In total, the USG has pledged USD 510 million for earthquake relief and reconstruction efforts.  The U.S. private sector is also engaged.  A consortium of CEOs (GE, Pfizer, Citigroup, Xerox and UPS) is spearheading the South Asia Earthquake Relief Fund, which has already attracted approximately USD 24 million.  Independent estimates place total U.S. private donations at over USD 130 million.  7.  (C) Our prompt and generous response has helped initiate a shift in Pakistani attitudes about the United States, qualitatively improving bilateral relations at official levels and sustaining the relationship during popular unrest surrounding the Danish cartoon controversy.  The hand-in-glove cooperation between U.S. and Pakistani military personnel has palpably reduced suspicions at the middle and upper ranks of the Pakistani army.  As we have drawn down our military presence, we have emphasized that our transition parallels the overall shift from emergency relief toward the civilian reconstruction phase of the recovery effort. Pakistanis, who have long been convinced that we are fair-weather friends, are beginning to understand that we are interested in a long-term relationship.  Democratization ---------------  8.  (C) President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007. U.S. visitors should remind their Pakistani interlocutors (particularly those in the military) of the importance our elected leaders - including President Bush and members of Congress - attach to this transition.  The government must address significant organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, not least of which is an empowered and well-trained election commission.  As a first step, we have urged President Musharraf to appoint a permanent, independent Chief Election Commissioner who is acceptable to all mainstream parties.  When engaging Pakistani contacts, U.S. officials should reinforce the need for civilian control of the military and for the military's full and permanent disengagement from electoral politics.  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  Afghanistan -----------  9.  (S) The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried that India is using its assets in Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan.  President Musharraf, his government and military leaders recognize that Pakistan must support the Karzai government as it attempts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  10.  (S) As illustrated by the recent heavy fighting in North and South Waziristan, Pakistan is struggling to curb insurgent activity, challenged by rugged terrain, Pakistan border security forces' limited resources and sometimes uneven support within the Pakistani military, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and the Frontier Corps.  The greatest hurdle is the Government's lack of a coherent strategy in the Tribal Areas along the Afghan border.  We consistently press the GOP to move forcefully against al-Qaida, Taliban and other anti-coalition militants, while simultaneously acknowledging the significant progress Pakistan has made in countering terrorist elements since September 2001.  The recent military operations initiated in North Waziristan by Pakistan's Special Services Group, supported by Pakistan Army Aviation and 11th Corps assets, marks a new level of commitment commensurate with America expectations. For the first time since 2001, the Pakistan military may clearly see the challenge to sovereignty posed by foreign militants who have been allowed sanctuary in the Tribal Areas.  India and Kashmir -----------------  11.   (S) President Musharraf and his senior advisors have consistently told us that they have made a strategic decision to end the militancy and even Indian officials acknowledge that the level of violence and cross-border infiltration has declined (though New Delhi attributes this to Indian security measures).  President Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to  ISLAMABAD 00003807  003 OF 004   control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in Delhi).  Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  While there has been little progress on these core issues relating to Kashmir, senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue process, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of five bus routes between the two countries.  12.  (C) Responding to widespread public opinion, the two governments agreed to open five new LOC crossing points and to permit cross-LOC cell phone service following the October 8 earthquake, to allow divided Kashmiri families the opportunity to comfort one another. These limited measures have the potential to changes the dynamic in Kashmir and may accelerate internal pressure on Islamabad and New Delhi to create additional space for interaction between Kashmiris in India and Pakistan.  13.  (S) India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue, and Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive.  President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful and mutually agreeable solution in Kashmir.  Global War on Terrorism -----------------------  14.  (S) Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the global war on terror, including its efforts against al-Qaida to deny safe haven to extremist elements in Pakistan's untamed Tribal Areas along the Afghan border. Following the GOP's decision to extend central government control into the Tribal Areas (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  The Pakistan military has suffered over 1000 casualties in the Tribal areas, with particularly heavy fighting in the first week of March, when militants occupied a key town in North Waziristan.  In recent months, the security situation, especially in Waziristan, has deteriorated, forcing the GOP to rethink its strategy. Musharraf has articulated a three-pronged approach comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the Tribal Areas and to provide training and rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  15.  (C) In the aftermath of the July 7 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on terrorist/extremist organizations in Pakistan to much public fanfare.  We have reserved judgment on whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run.  Initial law enforcement actions targeted the usual suspects -- conservative clerics and Islamist politicians -- prompting a strong popular backlash, with conservatives decrying the focus on Islamists.  Ultimately, the government released most detainees and watered down regulations intended to provide transparency on madrassa operations.  We have repeatedly pressed senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of key terrorist and extremist groups.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against madrassas that support, recruit for or shelter these organizations.  Balochistan -----------  16.  (S) Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling caution and a negotiated settlement that addresses Baloch concerns, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity to be suppressed. Currently, the pendulum appears to have swung toward the military option. This has clear implications for the  ISLAMABAD 00003807  004 OF 004   military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the Tribal Areas and in the war on terror.  Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan, in earthquake relief and in managing domestic unrest over the cartoons.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD72|06PESHAWAR109", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/8/2006 14:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003808  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KDEM SUBJECT: SLIGHT GAINS FOR PML IN SENATE ELECTIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 000072      B. PESHAWAR 00109  ISLAMABAD 00003808  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1,Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (C) In a follow-up to the January 2nd \"retirement\" of 50 Senators (reftel A), Members of the Provincial Assembly (MPAs) in each of Pakistan's four provinces were charged with electing replacements on March 6. Each Provincial Assembly elected 11 Senators in a secret-ballot overseen by the Provincial Election Commission; Senators from the Islamabad Capital Territory (1) and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (4) will be elected on March 10. The election saw the return of 20 Senators selected for retirement, as well as a slight gain of 5 seats for the ruling coalition (3 seats for the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) and 2 for its coalition partner, the Muttahidda Quami Movement (MQM)). Among the opposition, the six-party Islamist alliance, the Muttahidda Majlis-e Ammal (MMA) won 10 seats (a loss of one from the previous election), the PPP won 5 (a loss of two seats), the middle-class Baloch National Party (NP) won its first seat, and the rest of the opposition picked up one seat each. Newly elected Senators will take the Oath of Office on Friday March 12.  WINNERS AND LOSERS: COALITION- 56, Opposition-39 --------------------------------------------- --- 2. (U) The following is a provincial breakdown of the outcome.  BALOCHISTAN (MMA loses one seat, NP gains a seat) --------- Ruling      PML   5 (Jan Mohammad Khan Jamali,Mir Mohabbat Khan Marri, Saeed Ahmad Khan Hashmi, Rehana Yaya Baloch)  MMA   3 (Mohammad Ismail, Sabina Rauf,Rehmatullah Kakar )  NP    1 (Abdul Malik Baloch)  Opposition  BNP-A 1 (Mir Isarullah Khan)  JWP   1 (Shahid Hussain Bugti)  PUNJAB: (PML gained two seats, PPP lost one seat) ------ Ruling      PML   9  (Sardar Mohammad Khan Leghari, Syed Javed Ali Shah, Javed Ashraf Qazi (Minister of       Education),Mohammad Ali Durrani, Naseem Chatha, S. M. Zafar, Haroon Khan, Gulshan Saeed, Nilofar Bakhtiyar (PM's Advisor on Womens' Development)  Opposition    PML-N 1 (Mohamad Isaq Dar)               PPP   1 (Dr. Babar Awan)  SINDH  (PPP loses one seat, MQM gains one seat) ----- Ruling        PML   2 (Abdul Ghaffar Qureshi, Sameen Siddiqui                MQM   3 (Ahmed Ali, Col Syed Tahir Hussain Mashadi, Dr. Abdul Khaliq Pirzada)                PML-F 1 (Abdul Razak Thahim, Minister of Local Government and Rural Development )  Opposition    PPP   4 (Raza Rabbani, Safdar Ali, Dr. Javaid Leghari, Ratna Bhagwandas)                MMA   1 (Khalid Mahmood Soomroo (JUI-F))  NWFP (MMA loses one seat) ---- Ruling        MMA   6 (Professor Kurshid Ahmed, Mohammad Talha Mahmood,Maulana Gul Naseeb, Professor Mohammad Ibrahim Khan, Mohammad Azam Swati, Afia Zia)  ISLAMABAD 00003808  002.2 OF 002    Opposition         PML   3 (Fauzia Fakheruz Zaman, Saleem Saifullah Khan, Ammar Ahmed Khan)                PPP-S  1 (Mohammad Ghufan Khan)               ANP    1 (Dr. Iliyas Bilour)  3. (C) Notably, there were few surprises among the winners and losers of the March 6th contest. Most parties had calculated ahead of time the number of seats they were likely to win, and awarded tickets accordingly. On the government side, the decision to dump Punjab Senators and Cabinet Members Shehzad Waseem and Dr. Hafiz Sheikh was made several weeks in advance. The same holds true for the PPPP decision to deny prominent party leader Dr. Abdullah Riar a ticket from Sindh. The GOP insisted the BNP-A deny troublesome Senator Mohim Khan Baloch a ticket as a condition of continued PML support to the party; his replacement is viewed as more pliable. As a condition of its MPAs' support to other nationalist parties, the NP insisted on support for one Senate Seat, a seat now held by former Provincial Education Minister Abdul Malik Baloch.  The surprise defeats came on the PPP side: in NWFP, well-regarded Farhatullah Babar was unable to fend off a concerted PML campaign for his seat, while in Punjab, former World Bank official Dr. Akhbar Khwaja lost his technocrat seat to a PML challenger. Babar's defeat, however, marks the political rebirth of former PML Secretary General Salim Saifullah, who gained a seat.  4. (C) Comment. Embassy contacts in both the ruling and opposition parties, as well as several English language newspapers indicate that the March 6 Senate election can be judged fair. It was held by secret-ballot and monitored by officials from both the Provincial Election Commissions and the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) who traveled to each Province from Islamabad. The campaign process, however, was marred by allegations of illegal activities, including vote-buying and promises of development resources to MPAs by all sides. Overall, in the Embassy's judgement, the ruling coalition's slightly increased edge in the Senate will not have any significant policy or legislative impact. In the opposition, the PPP, however, may suffer in the medium-term from the loss of three of its more articulate, active members. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/10/2006 4:28", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003895  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: MILITARY AND MILITANTS CLASH IN NORTH WAZIRISTAN  ISLAMABAD 00003895  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (S//NF) Summary. March 1st and 2nd raids on militant training facilites by the Pakistan Special Operations Task Force (SOTF) in Miram Shah and Sedgai, North Waziristan led to the biggest clashes in the region in three years. The GOP military attacks and subsequent retaliatory strikes reportedly led by militant leaders Maulana Abdul Khaliq and Sadiq Noor--which included a one-day takeover of government buildings in Miram Shah-- have led to approximately 100 militant casualties and the death of four soldiers, according to GHQ. As of March 7th, Frontier Corps forces had largely regained control of Miram Shah, though militants are still engaged in attacks against military and government forces. Pakistani military spokesmen have blamed the porous Pakistan-Afghan border and what they are calling Afghanistan's inability to control the Taliban insurgents on its side of the border for the escalating military conflict in the Waziristan region. End Summary.  Strike Leads to Heavy Clashes ----------------------------- 2. (S//NF) On March 1, GHQ reports that the Pakistani SOTF raided a militant training compound near  Miram Shah. A day later, Pakistan military forces struck a militant training facility in Sedgai, North Waziristan. The March 2nd attack killed 35 \"foreign fighters\"--including \"Arabs and Chechens\" as well as 10 local facilitators, according to Interservices Public Relations Spokesman Shaukat Sultan. Militant leaders Maulvi Abdul Khaliq Haqqani and Maulana Sadiq Noor--who Pakistani military officials say have been spearheading attacks against Pakistani military forces and government officials since December--ordered an immediate retaliatory attack against Pakistani military forces in the Miram Shah area. During the attack, militant forces temporarily took control of some government buildings, and launched rockets against Pakistan military camps. GHQ reports that the attacks led to the death of one Army soldier and three Frontier Corps soldiers; they also damaged telephone and electricity infrastructure in Miram Shah.  3. (S//NF) The military has launched several raids, including on the compounds of Abdul Khaliq, Sadiq Noor, and Siraj Haqqani. Pakistani military officials indicate that up to 100 militants have been killed. On March 7, the North Waziristan Political Agent oversaw the demolition of Khaliq's madrassa in Miram Shah. Later that evening, he was nearly killed when his vehicle was ambushed while travelling on the main road from Miram Shah to Mir Ali.  4. (C) As of March 6, GHQ and North Waziristan Political Agent Zahir-ul Islam reported that the military had re-asserted control over Miram Shah, though pockets of resistence may remain. The political administration has enforced a curfew and cordon of Miram Shah, including suspending traffic on the main road between Miram Shah and Bannu. Peshawar contacts and press reports indicate that the populace of Miram Shah has emptied out into neighboring Bannu and Karak to avoid the fighting. The military is attempting to stop the exodus of local residents to Bannu, Mir Ali, Kohat, and DI Khan, fearing that militants may also find safe-haven in the \"settled\" areas of NWFP.  Background on Abdul Khaliq Haqqani and Saddiq Noor --------------------------------------------- ---- 5.(C) Several Pakistani press reports dating back to September and November 2005 tie Maulvi Abdul Khaliq Haqqani and Maulana Saddiq Noor to known anti-coaltion militants Abdullah Masood, Zakeem Khan, former Afghan Taliban commander Jalaluddin Haqqani and his son, Siraj Haqqani. Abdul Khaliq heads the Darul Uloom Fareeda Gulshan-Ilm madrassa in Miram Shah, the target of a March 7 raid. ISPR Spokesperson Shaukat Sultan called Maulana Sadiq Noor a \"key Al Qaida facilitator\"  ISLAMABAD 00003895  002.2 OF 002   and placed him on the military's \"most wanted\" list in November 2005. Some reports indicate that he was targetted during the September 14 raid on the Haqqani Madrassa in Mir Ali because of his communications with Abdullah Masood; he continued to elude capture during a subsequent November 2005 negotiation with the Utmanzai Wazir tribe  Musharraf Blames Afghanistan ---------------------------- 6. (C) Some press reports indicate that some of the militants killed were Afghan. President Musharraf and Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao were quick to point fingers via the press at Afghanistan for the continued militant \"incursion\" across the porous Afghan-Pakistan border. As part of a continuing offensive on Afghanistan over the past few days, Prime Minister Aziz yesterday suggested to reporters that Afghanistan's inability to control its borders is destabilizing the FATA and told reporters critical of the military operations in the region that the sustained military action in Waziristan was necessitated by armed militants entering Pakistani territory.  Comment ------- 7. (C) If the casualty estimates are accurate, then this series of engagements is one of the most serious since Pakistani military forces first entered Waziristan.  In the Embassy's judgement, the Pakistan Military's strikes on March 1-2 stirred up a hornet's nest that the military was underprepared for. Though the situation has calmed in the last two days, it is too soon to assess the medium and long term effects. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/10/2006 6:04", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003898  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: MILITARY AND MILITANTS CLASH IN NORTH WAZIRISTAN  ISLAMABAD 00003898  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (S//NF) Summary. March 1st and 2nd raids on militant training facilites by the Pakistan Special Operations Task Force (SOTF) in Miram Shah and Sedgai, North Waziristan led to the biggest clashes in the region in three years. The GOP military attacks and subsequent retaliatory strikes reportedly led by militant leaders Maulana Abdul Khaliq and Sadiq Noor--which included a one-day takeover of government buildings in Miram Shah-- have led to approximately 100 militant casualties and the death of four soldiers, according to GHQ. As of March 7th, Frontier Corps forces had largely regained control of Miram Shah, though militants are still engaged in attacks against military and government forces. Pakistani military spokesmen have blamed the porous Pakistan-Afghan border and what they are calling Afghanistan's inability to control the Taliban insurgents on its side of the border for the escalating military conflict in the Waziristan region. End Summary.  Strike Leads to Heavy Clashes ----------------------------- 2. (S//NF) On March 1, GHQ reports that the Pakistani SOTF raided a militant training compound near  Miram Shah. A day later, Pakistan military forces struck a militant training facility in Sedgai, North Waziristan. The March 2nd attack killed 35 \"foreign fighters\"--including \"Arabs and Chechens\" as well as 10 local facilitators, according to Interservices Public Relations Spokesman Shaukat Sultan. Militant leaders Maulvi Abdul Khaliq Haqqani and Maulana Sadiq Noor--who Pakistani military officials say have been spearheading attacks against Pakistani military forces and government officials since December--ordered an immediate retaliatory attack against Pakistani military forces in the Miram Shah area. During the attack, militant forces temporarily took control of some government buildings, and launched rockets against Pakistan military camps. GHQ reports that the attacks led to the death of one Army soldier and three Frontier Corps soldiers; they also damaged telephone and electricity infrastructure in Miram Shah.  3. (S//NF) The military has launched several raids, including on the compounds of Abdul Khaliq, Sadiq Noor, and Siraj Haqqani. Pakistani military officials indicate that up to 100 militants have been killed. On March 7, the North Waziristan Political Agent oversaw the demolition of Khaliq's madrassa in Miram Shah. Later that evening, he was nearly killed when his vehicle was ambushed while traveling on the main road from Miram Shah to Mir Ali.  4. (C) As of March 6, GHQ and North Waziristan Political Agent Zahir-ul Islam reported that the military had re-asserted control over Miram Shah, though pockets of resistence may remain. The political administration has enforced a curfew and cordon of Miram Shah, including suspending traffic on the main road between Miram Shah and Bannu. Peshawar contacts and press reports indicate that the populace of Miram Shah has emptied out into neighboring Bannu and Karak to avoid the fighting. The military is attempting to stop the exodus of local residents to Bannu, Mir Ali, Kohat, and DI Khan, fearing that militants may also find safe-haven in the \"settled\" areas of NWFP.  Background on Abdul Khaliq Haqqani and Saddiq Noor --------------------------------------------- ---- 5.(C) Several Pakistani press reports dating back to September and November 2005 tie Maulvi Abdul Khaliq Haqqani and Maulana Saddiq Noor to known anti-coaltion militants Abdullah Masood, Zakeem Khan, former Afghan Taliban commander Jalaluddin Haqqani and his son, Siraj Haqqani. Abdul Khaliq heads the Darul Uloom Fareeda Gulshan-e Ilm madrassa in Miram Shah, the target of a March 7 raid. ISPR Spokesperson Shaukat Sultan called Maulana Sadiq Noor a \"key Al Qaida facilitator\"  ISLAMABAD 00003898  002 OF 002   and placed him on the military's \"most wanted\" list in November 2005. Some reports indicate that he was targeted during the September 14 raid on the Haqqani Madrassa in Mir Ali because of his communications with Abdullah Masood; he continued to elude capture during a subsequent November 2005 negotiation with the Utmanzai Wazir tribe.  Musharraf Blames Afghanistan ---------------------------- 6. (C) Some press reports indicate that some of the militants killed were Afghan. President Musharraf and Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao were quick to point fingers via the press at Afghanistan for the continued militant \"incursion\" across the porous Afghan-Pakistan border. As part of a continuing offensive on Afghanistan over the past few days, Prime Minister Aziz yesterday suggested to reporters that Afghanistan's inability to control its borders is destabilizing the FATA and told reporters critical of the military operations in the region that the sustained military action in Waziristan was necessitated by armed militants entering Pakistani territory.  Comment ------- 7. (C) If the casualty estimates are accurate, then this series of engagements is one of the most serious since Pakistani military forces first entered Waziristan.  In the Embassy's judgment, the Pakistan Military's strikes on March 1-2 stirred up a hornet's nest that the military was underprepared for. Though the situation has calmed in the last two days, it is too soon to assess the medium and long term effects. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/17/2006 11:38", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 004373  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  JCS: PLEASE PASS TO GENERAL PACE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/15/2016 TAGS: EFIN, ETTC, PK, PREL, PTER, KTFN SUBJECT: POLITICAL SCENESETTER FOR GENERAL PACE  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S) The U.S. Mission in Pakistan warmly welcomes your planned March 20 - 22 visit to Pakistan.  As demonstrated during President Bush's recent visit to Islamabad, both President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward enlightened moderation.  They view the President's visit as a landmark in the relationship and were gratified that he decided stay overnight in Pakistan.  Energy Secretary Bodeman's March 13 follow up visit addressing  SIPDIS Pakistan's concerns about energy was also helpful.  Your visit comes as Pakistan's leaders are working to contain the fallout from the Danish cartoon controversy, while simultaneously suppressing violent separatists in Balochistan, combatting al-Qa'ida and extremists in the Tribal Areas along the Afghan border and guiding earthquake recovery operations.  The government remains fully engaged in earthquake recovery operations, with attention turning from emergency relief toward long-term reconstruction.  We are optimistic that robust USG participation in the earthquake relief effort will promote more positive public opinion toward the United States and help us advance key U.S. objectives, including democratization, regional stability and progress in the global war on terror.  Our mission in Pakistan remains a critical high-threat post, as demonstrated by the March 2 bombing at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi that killed two staff members.  The Cartoon Controversy -----------------------  2. (C) Since mid-February, tens of thousands of Pakistani demonstrators have taken to the streets to protest the publication of the Danish cartoons.  Rallies in Lahore and Peshawar have been particularly destructive, with rampant looting and vandalism in parts of downtown Lahore and Peshawar and six protesters killed.  Although more demonstrations throughout Pakistan followed (including a widely-observed nationwide strike on the day of President Bush's arrival), enhanced security measures by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) has prevented any repetition of the unrestrained violence of last month.  Over time, the protests have taken on a greater political tone.  The outrage against the Danes and the EU still festers, but opportunistic politicians have subverted public sentiment in order to condemn the West as a whole (including the U.S.) and to embarrass the Musharraf government.  4.  (C) Following President Bush's lead, your visit presents an opportunity to remind the Pakistani people that the United States understands the sentiments of the Muslim community and that, while we strongly support freedom of expression, we also believe the press should behave responsibly.  More broadly, it will be an opportunity to underscore our desire for warm relations with the Muslim world and a sustained partnership with Pakistan as it addresses the long-term challenges of development and the immediate challenge of earthquake recovery.  Earthquake Relief -----------------  5. (U) The October 8 earthquake (7.6 on the Richter scale) in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was the strongest to hit the region in over a century.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) estimates that more than 73,000 individuals died in the quake, with more than 69,000 wounded and some 2.8 million survivors left homeless.  The United States has been Pakistan's most visible international partner in delivering emergency relief over the last five months.  6.  (U) The U.S. military has been on the ground since October 10.  At the peak of initial relief efforts, more than 1,200 personnel and 24 helicopters provided vital transport, logistics and medical and engineering support in affected areas.  As the emergency relief phase is coming to an end, we have closed the two U.S. military hospitals, turning over much of the medical equipment to Pakistani counterparts.  Our Seabee unit has also departed Muzaffarabad, leaving behind 25 pieces of heavy construction equipment as a donation to Pakistani military engineering units.  U.S. airlift operations will be phased out in late March.  7.  (U) The U.S. military and USAID collaborated closely on the civilian relief effort, with the military providing logistics and USAID working with NGOs to deliver supplies and services in camps and villages.  USAID has provided more than USD 60 million in additional humanitarian assistance through NGOs and the United Nations, including blankets, tents, plastic sheeting and shelter kits to help the affected population make it through the harsh Himalayan winter.  USAID recently made its first reconstruction grant of USD 15 million to rebuild schools and hospitals.  In total, the USG has pledged $510 million for earthquake relief and reconstruction efforts.  The U.S. private sector is also engaged.  A consortium of CEOs (GE, Pfizer, Citigroup, Xerox and UPS) is spearheading the South Asia Earthquake Relief Fund, which has already attracted approximately $24 million.  8.  (C) Our prompt and generous response is shifting Pakistani attitudes about the United States, qualitatively improving bilateral relations and sustaining the relationship  during popular unrest.  The hand-in-glove cooperation between U.S. and Pakistani military personnel has palpably reduced suspicions at the middle and upper ranks of the Pakistani army.  As we have drawn down our military presence, we have emphasized that our transition is in parallel with the shift from emergency relief toward the civilian reconstruction phase of the recovery effort.  Pakistanis, who have long been convinced that we are fair-weather friends, are beginning to understand that we are interested in a long-term relationship.  Democratization ---------------  9.  (C) President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007. U.S. visitors should remind their Pakistani interlocutors (particularly those in the military) of the importance our elected leaders - including President Bush and members of Congress - attach to this transition.  The government must address significant organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, not least of which is an empowered and well-trained election commission.  As a first step, we have urged President Musharraf to appoint a permanent, independent Chief Election Commissioner who is acceptable to all mainstream parties.  When engaging Pakistani contacts, U.S. officials should reinforce the need for civilian control of the military and for the military's full and permanent disengagement from electoral politics.  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  Afghanistan -----------  10.  (S) The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan remains susceptible to suspicions and recriminations on both sides, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried that India is using assets in Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan. President Musharraf, his government and military leaders recognize that Pakistan must support the Karzai government as it attempts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  Over the longer term, President Bush's announcement of Reconstruction Opportunity Zone trade benefits could help boost employment opportunities on both sides of the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.  11.  (S) The uptick in Pakistani military-militant clashes in North and South Waziristan, which began in December 2005 and surged in early March 2006 in North Waziristan, underscores Pakistan's difficulty in curbing insurgent activity.  Despite a stated commitment by GOP and Pakistani military officials, limited resources, rugged terrain, and uneven capability and support within the Pakistani military, Frontier Corps, and Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) limit Pakistan's ability to deliver quick results. We acknowledge the significant progress Pakistan has made in countering terrorist elements since September 2001, but we continue to press the GOP to move forcefully against al-Qa'ida, and more recently, the Taliban and other anti-Coalition militants (ACMs).  India and Kashmir -----------------  12.   (S) President Musharraf and his senior advisors have consistently told us that they have made a strategic decision to end the militancy and even Indian officials acknowledge that the level of violence and cross-border infiltration has declined (though Delhi attributes this to Indian security measures).  President Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in Delhi).  Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on final status, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  While there has been little progress on these core issues relating to Kashmir, senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue process, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of five bus routes between the two countries.  13.  (C) Responding to widespread public opinion, the two governments agreed to open five new LOC crossing points and to permit cross-LOC cell phone service following the October 8 earthquake, to allow divided Kashmiri families the opportunity to comfort one another. These limited measures are changing the dynamic in Kashmir and may accelerate internal pressure on Islamabad and Delhi to create additional space for interaction between Kashmiris in India and Pakistan.  14.  (S) India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue, and Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive.  President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful and mutually agreeable solution in Kashmir.  Global War on Terrorism -----------------------  15.  (S) Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the global war on terror, including its efforts against al-Qa'ida and its forceful -- though so far unsuccessful -- efforts to deny safe haven to extremist elements in Pakistan's untamed Tribal Areas along the Afghan border. Following the GOP's decision to extend central government control into the Tribal Areas (historically a \"no go\" region for the GOP), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance. The Pakistan military has suffered over 1,000 casualties in the Tribal areas, with particularly heavy fighting during the days surrounding President Bush's visit.  In recent months, the security situation, especially in Waziristan, has deteriorated, forcing the GOP to rethink its strategy. Musharraf has articulated a three-pronged approach comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the Tribal Areas and to provide the Pakistani military training on rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  16.  (C) In the aftermath of the July 7 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on terrorist/extremist organizations in Pakistan to much public fanfare.  We have reserved judgment on whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run.  Initial law enforcement actions targeted the usual suspects -- conservative clerics and Islamist politicians -- prompting a strong popular backlash, with conservatives decrying the focus on Islamists.  Ultimately, the government released most detainees and watered down regulations intended to shine light on madrassa operations.  We have repeatedly pressed senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of key terrorist and extremist groups. We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against madrassas that support, recruit for, or shelter these organizations.  Balochistan -----------  17.  (S) Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling caution and a negotiated settlement that addresses Baloch concerns, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity to be suppressed. To date, the pendulum appears to have swung toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the Tribal Areas and in the war on terror.  The Pakistani military is already overstretched along its western borders, in North and South Waziristan, in earthquake relief and in managing domestic unrest over the cartoons.  Moreover an escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/17/2006 12:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004386  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/16/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK, IN, PTER SUBJECT: PUGWASH CONFERENCE: KASHMIRI CONFERENCE HIGHLIGHTS OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES.  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1.  (C) Summary: A three-day gathering of Kashmiris, Pakistanis and Indians in Islamabad highlighted the continuing effort of President Musharraf to build support for his peace proposals.  The meeting featured a two-and-a-half hour exchange with Musharraf on his ideas for demilitarization, self-government and joint management. Separately, Musharraf met with pro-Indian Kashmiri politician (and member of Parliament) Omar Abdullah, who by all accounts was favorably impressed with Musharraf's flexibility and commitment to peace.  On the negative side, the Kashmiris fought bitterly among themselves, with some (including the JKLF's Yasin Malik) stressing the need to include the militants in any peace dialogue.  End Summary.  2.  (C) Kashmiris from both sides of the Line of Control (and the diaspora), representing a range of political positions gathered in Islamabad with Pakistani and Indian politicians and academics for a March 10-12 conference that highlighted the changing dynamics of the Kashmir issue and the deep divisions among Kashmiri groups.  The conference was organized by Pugwash, an international organization based in Washington, London, Geneva and Rome, that focuses on security and conflict resolution.  Kashmiri leaders included Omar Abdullah (National Conference), Yasin Malik (JKLF), Sajjad Ghani Lone (People's Conference), Mehbooba Mufti (Jammu and Kashmir People's Democratic Party), Sardar Qayyum (Muslim Conference) and Abdul Ghani Bhatt (Muslim Conference -- Indian Kashmir).  The three days of meetings proceeded under the rotating chairmanship of Pakistani General (ret.) Talaat Masood (a respected policy analyst and Embassy contact), his Indian counterpart and Pugwash Secretary General Paolo Cotta-Ramusino.  Two leaders who were notably absent were Mirwaiz Umar Farooq (APHC) and Syed Ali Geelani.  The Mirwaiz's public explanation for his absence was an injury to his ankle, though our colleagues in the diplomatic community suspect that having boycotted an earlier Indian roundtable, the Mirwaiz felt he should boycott this event too.  3.  (C) On the eve of the conference, PolCouns met with Yasin Malik and several Pakistan-based JKLF leaders.  Malik downplayed the significance of the conference, predicting that meetings on the margins would be more important than the session itself.  He repeatedly stressed the need to include Kashmiri militant groups in the peace process, saying that he had made the same point to Manmohan Singh.  He said he had told Singh that outside of Jammu, India and its supporters (i.e., Omar Abdullah) had \"zero support\" in Kashmir, and that for any peace initiative to succeed it would have to draw in militants.  He had made the same point directly to moderates like Abdullah who, in his view, were in danger of being seen as Indian appeasers and of losing support in Kashmir.  4.  (C) President Musharraf spent two and half hours with the group on the opening day, explaining his proposals for demilitarization, self-governance and joint management of Kashmir.  The objective, he said was to find a solution that would not involve redrawing borders or making the Line of Control (LoC) permanent, but to instead make the LoC irrelevant.  He stressed that these were simply ideas, and that Pakistan would welcome Indian input but that time was of the essence.  Leaders on both sides needed to seize the \"fleeting opportunity\" for peace.  5.  (C) Musharraf also held a separate 45-minute one-on-one with Omar Abdullah, whose visit represented the first trip to Pakistan in recent memory by a leading pro-Indian Kashmiri leader.  According to press reports (including The Hindu), Abdullah emerged from the meeting impressed that \"Musharraf has shown greater flexibility than Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.\"  He remarked that Musharraf was \"the best bet for India to do business with,\" as he had \"shifted from the traditional maximalist position on Kashmir and shown flexibility.\"  6.  (C) Talaat Masood told PolCouns that the actual proceedings of the conference were less important than the opportunity it provided for discussions that would never have happened otherwise. For the first time people who had avoided each other were sitting at the same table.  Masood credited the Indian leadership for allowing broad participation.  ISLAMABAD 00004386  002 OF 002   Secondly, according to Masood, the conference had highlighted that \"the age of favorites is over\" as evidenced by the fact that Pakistan and India had been talking to a range of Kashmiri leaders.  Masood noted that Pugwash had been talking to Kashmiri militant groups, including Hizbul-Mujahedin (but not \"dangerous groups\" like Lashkar e-Tayyiba), and that they too were interested in dialogue.  Thirdly, Masood thought it was significant that a number of Indian officials who participated had come away impressed with both Musharraf and Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri, who had hosted a reception on the opening night.  7.  (C) Masood observed that the conference had highlighted a significant challenge, namely the divisions among the militant groups.  He reported that during one session, the Kashmiris from the diaspora and from both sides of the LoC had been sent into a room to deliberate on possible solutions to the Kashmir conflict, while the Pakistani and Indian delegates were sent into a second room with the same instructions.  The latter group came to agreement on some recommendations, while the Kashmiris \"could not agree on anything.\"  In part, Masood blamed diaspora Kashmiris, who had created \"an industry\" out of the Kashmir conflict. However, the Kashmiri \"rightists\" were also unhelpful because of \"insecurities\" as they were caught between militant groups on the one hand and an evolving peace effort on the other. As a prominent case in point, he remarked that Yasin Malik was trying to be a champion of the militants, but that militant groups were shunning him out of concern that he was too accommodating on Musharraf's agenda.  Masood held Malik largely responsible for blocking the proposed concluding statement of the conference, which would have stated that \"violence in all its forms should cease forthwith.\"  (One press report recounts a shouting match on the steps of the Foreign Ministry among Kashmiri participants and members of the Pakistani press corps.)  8.  (C) Masood was also concerned that, as he saw it, Musharraf's advisors in the military and intelligence services were \"out of sync\" with the President himself. Musharraf was much more forward-leaning and flexible than some of his supporters.  Masood considered the Foreign Ministry to be an exception, however, assessing Kasuri's performance with the delegates as \"brilliant.\"  Comment -------  9.  (C) This was the third visit to Pakistan of leading Kashmiris over the past year, following a visit by an APHC delegation last June (that included the Mirwaiz) and a visit by Yasin Malik and others after the October earthquake. The conference nonetheless represented a milestone in that it saw the joint participation of an unprecedented range of Kashmiri groups and included a meeting between Musharraf and a pro-Indian Kashmiri politician.  The event also marked a continuation of Musharraf's effort to broaden the constituency in India and Kashmir for his \"out of the box\" ideas.  The anti-conference stance of militant groups, as reported in the press, is also a backhanded indication of its significance.  Jamiat-ul-Mujahideen Commander \"General\" Abdullah called the conference a \"sellout\" and accused Musharraf of seeking to foist Omar Abdullah on the Kashmiri people.  The commander of Al Umar Mujahideen charged Musharraf with damaging the Pakistani cause at American behest and characterized Pugwash as \"an attempt to put Kashmir on the back-burner.\"    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2006 14:17", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004595  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: DRL FUNDING FOR 2007 PAKISTAN ELECTIONS   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (C) Summary:  Post has designed an electoral support strategy in order to promote free and fair elections national and provincial elections in 2007.  In order to implement fully the various aspects of this strategy, we will require dedicated funding support from DRL to complement our USAID DG and PAS funding, which will support other aspects of the electoral support program.  For funding to be effective, we will need to begin now to solicit specific election-related proposals with the intention of seeing implementation as early as June 2006.  Post requests that DRL make funds available and solicit proposals for the following projects discussed in more detail in the following paragraphs:  International Election Observation including Parallel Vote Count Development of an Election Code of Conduct Voter Education Activities in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas Training of Police Forces on Election Security  End Summary  Election Observation:  Estimated Cost $10-20 million  2. (C) Opposition political parties and the general public understandably have a low-level of confidence in election processes in Pakistan.  Fraud and rigging of elections, up to and including the 2005 local bodies contest, have occurred with great regularity in the nomination, campaign, voting, and counting phases.  Post believes, therefore, that it will be imperative to ensure that international observation covers all of these phases in an effort to provide both international validation of the contest and increased confidence in the results.  Given the persistent allegations of rigging during the counting process, a parallel vote count needs to be included as part of the observation.  Post has discussed the need for international observation with other donors.  While there is uniform agreement on the need for such a mission, there is, as yet, no readiness on the part of other local missions to commit to funding.  As it will take significant time for any implementing partner to organize the observation and parallel vote count, we strongly recommend that DRL move immediately to conduct a limited solicitation by invitation (NDI, IRI, IFES, Carter Center, etc.) and award a grant to enable an international NGO to begin this process.  We will look to DRL to determine the necessary funding level and to coordinate with other donor nations on their contributions to this process.  Election Code of Conduct: Estimated Cost $500,000  3. (C) Developing an electoral code of conduct that is agreeable to all parties will be essential during the 2007 election process.  In the past, the code has been imposed on parties by the Election Commission with no consultation and had significant loopholes that have been routinely exploited by the ruling party.  For this reason, post believes that international technical assistance will be necessary (1) to ensure that the code adequately prevents any behavior that could unduly prejudice the outcome of the election and (2) to facilitate negotiations among the parties and with the Election Commission.  PAS is willing to use its Speaker's Program to fund travel and support of one or more international experts for this process.  Additional support from DRL will allow for the participation of additional experts including from the region.  Development of an Electoral Code of Conduct will need to take place in December 2006/January 2007 in order to meet the likely election timeframe of late 2007.  Funding for this activity can occur from FY 07 funds, but the solicitation and award process will need to take place in October for this to occur.  Voter Education: Estimated Cost $1 million  4. (C) Political transformation of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) is a high-priority USG objective.  The 2007 National Assembly elections are a key opportunity to begin this transformation and to expand the franchise beyond the small number who traditionally vote from this region. Post believes that additional voter education/\"get out the vote campaigns\" particularly targeting women are an essential component of holding a credible election in this area in 2007.  We look to DRL to finance such education through a grant to an international NGO through a limited selection process.  NGOs would need to be strongly encouraged to utilize established local partners as a key component of their program given the difficulties of working in the FATA.  ISLAMABAD 00004595  002 OF 002    Training of Police: Estimated Cost $250,000  5. (S/NF) In advance of the 2005 local bodies elections, post successfully engaged with the GOP to prevent the involvement of intelligence agencies in the electoral process.  With this channel of manipulation closed, provincial and district governments turned to the local police to intimidate, harass, and manipulate candidates and voters.  We believe that training of District Police Officers on the appropriate methodology for providing security during an election can help to inculcate a sense of professionalism within the force, thereby limiting abuses.  In addition, given the violent nature of Pakistani polls, professional training may well help to increase security.  Post already has an active police training program run through DOJ's ICITAP.  We recommend for this reason that DRL transfer necessary funds to ICITAP to carry out this additional specialized training approximately two months in advance of the election date.  Comment  6. (C) Post appreciates DRL's consideration and prompt funding of these proposals.  We believe that these discreet programs will play a crucial role in ensuring free and fair elections in Pakistan and will build on USAID and PAS work in complementary areas. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2006 14:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004597  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: ASFANDYAR WALI KHAN TO VISIT THE UNITED STATES  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d.  1. (U) This is an action request.  See para. 5  2. (C) Senator Asfandyar Wali Khan, Chairman of the secular Pashtun-nationalist Awami National Party (ANP) called on Ambassador on March 17 to discuss his recent meeting with President Musharraf (septel).  According to Asfandyar, the ANP has taken a strategic decision to support the GOP's efforts against extremist and Islamist elements operating in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP).  As historically the strongest rival to the Islamists in these regions, ANP cooperation with the government is critical to combating successfully terrorist and extremist elements in these regions and to advancing the government's overall strategy of political, economic, and social transformation.  3. (C) Asfandyar's decision to cooperate with the GOP marks a significant change in ANP tactics that carry with it potential risks in breaking from the united anti-Musharraf opposition platform.  We believe that those in the ANP who wish to challenge Asfandyar's leadership, such as his stepmother Begum Nasim Wali Khan, may attempt to exploit Asfandyar's overtures to divide the party.  Such leaders do not/not share Asfandyar's willingness to work with the United States and the GOP on our efforts to combat extremism/terrorism.  For this reason, we believe that immediate overtures showing strong support for Asfandyar, as a result of his decision to cooperate with Musharraf, are essential.  Senior-level meetings in Washington will help to reassure his constituents that he is in a position to advocate effectively on their behalf and will offer us an opportunity to exchange views and strategies with a like-minded Pashtun leader.  4. (U) Senator Asfandyar Wali Khan will be visiting Washington from April 3-13.  We recommend in keeping with our general practice for Pakistani opposition leaders, including former PM Bhutto, that meetings be arranged at the Deputy Assistant Secretary or Office Director level. Based on Asfandyar's requests, post recommends meetings with the following USG offices/individuals:  -- National Security Council, Senior Director for South Asia -- Office of the Vice President -- Central Intelligence Agency -- National Counterterrorism Center -- Department of State, Bureau of South Asian Affairs, Deputy Assistant Secretary -- Department of State, Director of Policy Planning -- Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Deputy Assistant Secretary -- U.S. Agency for International Development, Bureau of Asia and the Near East, Deputy Assistant Administrator -- Department of Defense, International Security Affairs, Near East and South Asian Affairs -- Department of Transportation, Office of International Transportation and Trade -- Department of Energy, Office of Policy and International Affairs  In addition, Asfandyar has requested assistance in organizing meetings with the Rand Corporation and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.  5. (U) Action Requested:  Post requests that Department assist in organizing requested meetings for Senator Asfandyar Wali Khan during his visit to Washington. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/22/2006 2:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004761  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL -- PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, MOPS, MASS, AF SUBJECT: VICE CHIEF OF ARMY STAFF WANTS ANA TO JOIN U.S.-PAK JOINT EXERCISE   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  During a March 17 conversation with PM - A/S Hillen, Pakistan's Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan Saleem Hyat said that he would welcome the expanding a joint exercise between the U.S. and Pakistan military schedule for later this spring to include a unit from the Afghan National Army (ANA).  The exercise in question -- Inspired Gambit -- is scheduled for May 2 - 10, with a training location at Tarbela and exercise site at Cherat, NWFP. The exercise will focus on preparation of air assault operations at a battalion level and execution at a company level.  GEN Ahsan believed that including an ANA unit (perhaps one ANA squadron attached to each participating U.S. and Pakistani unit) would increase interoperability and cross-border cooperation, as well as help to cool the heated public rhetoric that has characterized the Pakistani-Afghan bilateral relationship over the past month.  2.  (C)  GEN Hyat first raised the prospect of ANA forces joining the Inspired Gambit exercise during his March 6 meeting in Islamabad with GEN Abizaid.  His fulsome discussion of the proposal in his meeting with A/S Hillen reveal that he has given the idea serious consideration in the interim.  Emb Islamabad supports GEN Hyat's suggestion, agreeing that folding an ANA unit into this exercise offers an early opportunity to advance cross-border cooperation and build trust between these neighbors.  3.  (C)  Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) officers raised the possibility of ANA participation in a March 20 Inspired Gambit planning meeting with the Pakistan Army's Directorate General-Military Training (DGMT); DGMT representatives were receptive, although surprised to hear that the idea originated with GEN Ahsan.  The Pakistani side said that -- for cultural, dietary and language reasons -- they would look into providing mess and billets for the ANA contingent, while the ODRP representative would take on responsibility for transporting the ANA troops to/from Afghanistan.  4.  (C)  Comment:  As we work to increase positive interaction between Pakistn and Afghanistan, this is a positive development.  We hope that Embassy Kabul and CFC-A will encourage Afghan participation in this exercise.  5.  (U)  MINIMIZE CONSIDERED. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/22/2006 5:59", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004767  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2021 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, MOPS, PK SUBJECT: ANP AND PPP MOVING TOWARDS ACCOMMODATION WITH THE GOVERNMENT   ISLAMABAD 00004767  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d.  1.  (S) Summary:  In recent separate meetings, Awami National Party (ANP) Chairman Senator Asfandyar Wali Khan and Pakistan People's Party Parliamentarians (PPPP) Chairman Makhdoom Amin Fahim delivered closely coordinated messages to the Embassy. Both leaders were prepared to support an alliance of \"liberal\" forces under Musharraf, as their parties and the ruling party would face a common enemy in the 2007 elections -- the Islamists.  If this were not possible, the parties would accept a post-electoral alliance.  The ANP and PPPP were prepared to cooperate with the GOP on the Global War on Terrorism and its concept of \"enlightened moderation.\" Asfandyar, however, made several suggestions to improve GOP performance in this area, including: transfer of intelligence personnel previously involved in supporting the Taliban, increased emphasis on economic/social development and political reform in FATA, and closer coordination between liberal parties and the GOP in pursuit of extremist/terrorist elements.  End Summary.  Awami National Party --------------------  2. (C) In a March 17 meeting with the Ambassador, ANP Chairman Senator Asfandyar Wali Khan stated that following extensive discussions the ANP had finally arrived at a common understanding with the GOP.  Asfandyar's call followed immediately from his first meeting with President Musharraf since the 2002 elections.  According to Asfandyar, the two leaders agreed that they shared a common vision to promote a moderate, democratic Pakistan and a common goal of defeating terrorist and extremist elements.  Asfandyar promised his party's cooperation in the GOP's efforts to track and apprehend terrorists in FATA and NWFP and agreed to share any information that his party developed on their whereabouts. Asfandyar sought an electoral understanding for 2007 with the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) and other like-minded parties, including the PPPP, in which they would support common candidates in order to minimize the success of Islamist parties.  Asfandyar indicated that Musharraf was receptive but non-commital.  Asfandyar made clear that, absent such an agreement, his party would still offer its support to GOP counterterrorism efforts and would participate in a post-election coalition government.  Asfandyar seemed relatively convinced that the ANP would be given a fair chance during the 2007 elections following his discussions with Musharraf.  3. (S) While Asfandyar termed his meeting with Musharraf \"positive,\" he shared a number of concerns about the GOP's counterterrorism efforts.  Asfandyar maintained that, although the leadership of the Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISI) was committed to tracking and apprehending al-Qaida and former Taliban, its on-the-ground operatives were not.  Many had previously supported these elements and had personal connections that have led them to defy Musharraf's policy.  To overcome this problem, Asfandyar recommended the immediate transfer of all ISI agents from FATA that had previously worked with the Taliban and mujahideen.  Asfandyar argued that increased emphasis needed to be placed on social and economic development in the FATA as a complement to military/law enforcement efforts.  He praised the new GOP development plan and stated that he was providing Musharraf a copy of his party's own plan so that the two could be merged. Asfandyar asserted that political reform was necessary in the FATA.  Immediate progress could be made in all agencies, save North and South Waziristan, where extremists groups had a stranglehold on local politics.  As a first step, administration should be shifted from the federal to the NWFP provincial government, thereby building political ties between the agencies and the NWFP.  Asfandyar  ISLAMABAD 00004767  002.2 OF 002   claimed to have pressed Musharraf for closer cooperation with his party as it pursued terrorists in the FATA.  He cited several cases in which local leaders from the ANP had been erroneously arrested and interrogated for alleged links to extremists.  Pakistan People's Party Parliamentarians  5. (C) In a separate meeting the same evening with poloff, PPPP Chairman Makhdoom Amin Fahim raised many of the same points, including the need for an electoral understanding with ANP and PML and the PPPP's willingness to participate in a coalition government.  Fahim again pressed for a resumption of serious negotiations between the PPPP and the government, lamenting the fact that his party had not been included in the ANP meetings.  According to Fahim, the PPPP is willing to negotiate all issues, including the future status of Benazir Bhutto, in pursuit of a common pre-election understanding and would not/not insist on her candidacy in the 2007 National Assembly elections.  He also expressed a strong desire to move quickly to bring together leaders of all parties to negotiate and implement changes in the election law.  Fahim stressed that the recent meeting between Bhutto and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) leader Shahbaz Sharif in Dubai was \"meaningless.\"  The PPPP wants to keep its alliance with the PML-N only long enough to recapture the opposition leader job in the Senate for Raza Rabbani.  After that, the PML-N can be easily abandoned.  Fahim emphasized that most of those remaining in the PML-N were neither democrats nor liberals, making the PML-N's participation in any common understanding problematic.  Comment  6. (C) Post believes that the ANP and the PPPP had coordinated their messages and are serious about their shared desire to build a pre-election coalition of like-minded moderate parties, including the PML.  Both recognize that a united opposition which includes the Islamists is contrary to their political goals and will ultimately weaken their parties.  With Fahim's statement that the PPPP is prepared to consider a non-elected role for Bhutto (at least until the National Assembly elections are over), the \"like-minded coalition\" may well be achievable.  The ANP's decision to cooperate actively with the GOP in counterterrorist operations in FATA and NWFP is important.  Its on-the-ground presence in these areas can help both to spur residents to increased cooperation and extend the government's information network in these critical areas.  7. (U) MINIMIZE CONSIDERED. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/24/2006 13:57", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 004960  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  H - PLEASE PASS TO SENATOR HAGEL'S OFFICE/REXON RYU, SSCI/ERIC ROSENBACH AND NAVY SENATE LIAISON CDR STEVE VAHSEN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2016 TAGS: AMGT, PREL, OTRA, OVIP SUBJECT: COORDINATING PAKISTAN PROGRAM FOR SENATOR HAGEL  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU) Post is looking forward to the anticipated visit to Islamabad by Senator Chuck Hagel on 12-15 March.  We understand from email and telephone communications with Senator Hagel's Legislative Assistant Rexon Ryu that the Senator desires a program addressing his interests as a chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (SFRC) and a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI).  To that end, post wishes to confirm the meetings and event that the Senator would like while visiting Pakistan.  2.  (SBU) Per email discussions with Mr. Ryu, post's Political Section has requested appointments for Senator Hagel with President Musharraf, Prime Minister Aziz, Foreign Minister Kasuri and Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan.  Post has not yet ascertained whether these officials will be in Islamabad on 12-13 April.  Post is awaiting guidance from the Senator's staff as to whether he would also like to schedule a lunch, dinner or non-meal roundtable with Pakistani opinion leaders.  3.  (S) Through OGA channels, post will also schedule a SSCI briefing for the Senator at the Embassy, seek a meeting with the Director General of ISI and plan an oversight excursion outside Islamabad, time permitting.  4.  (S)  Post wishes to caution WashDC visit organizers that it may not be possible to secure meetings with all of the GOP officials listed above; post will advise Mr. Ryu by email when it confirms each official's availability.  Post also notes that, due to logistic and security considerations associated with travel in Pakistan, it may not may be possible to organize an excursion outside the capital and still have sufficient time remaining to fit in all other requQted meetings/events.  Post looks forward to hearing the preferred parameters for the Senator's schedule and his priorities for meetings with Pakistani officials.  We would appreciate receiving a coordinated message from Mr. Ryu and from Eric Rosenbach (SSCI) through the appropriate State and OGA channels.  5.  (S)  Post also requests that WashDC visit organizers avoid any discussion or reference via unclassified email or telephone conversation to the portion of the Senator's Pakistan program being planned through OGA channels. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/27/2006 10:55", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005070  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/27/2016 TAGS: EFIN, ETTC, PK, PREL, PTER, KTFN SUBJECT: MFA SEEKS INFORMATION ON 1267 COMMITTEE DESIGNATIONS   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  Summary:  On March 24, MFA Director Tasneem Aslam advised DCM that the GOP seeks \"hard evidence\" from the USG that could be used in domestic legal proceedings on the implemenation of terror financing sanctions against organizations designated by the UN 1267 Committee.  Aslam claimed that the GOP has no/no information linking three organizations to terror activity or financing, and that it feared that it would be required by domestic courts to seek the organizations' delisting if it could not conclusively demonstrate that these organizations have engaged or supported terrorist activity.  Aslam also asked that the U.S. identify the specific members -- \"the worst cases\" -- in these organzations, so that terror financing links could be severed by targeted criminal prosecution of those individuals directly involved, rather than by sanctions applied to institutions widely regarded as legitimate charities by the Pakistan public.  End summary.  2.  (S)  On March 24, MFA Director General (UN and Policy Planing Directorate) Tasneem Aslam asked to meet Deputy Chief of Mission Peter W. Bodde to discuss the GOP's implementation of terror finance sanctions against organizations and individuals designated by the UN 1267 Committee.  Assuring the DCM that the GOP \"persistently applies\" all 1267 sanctions, Aslam said that the government has particular concerns regarding three organizations:  Al Rashid Trust, Al Akhtar Trust and Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD).  (Note:  Although Aslam referred several times to Jamaat-ud-Dawa as a 1267 Committee designee, she later corrected herself and noted that she was speaking in anticipation of a USG request in early April to amend the current Lashkar-e-Tayyba designation to include its charitable wing, JuD. End note.)  Aslam raised two key issues:  --  A request that the U.S. provide the GOP \"hard evidence\" that the GOP could use in domestic legal proceedings to defend its implementation of terror finance sanctions following a 1267 Committee designation; and  -- A request that the U.S. identify specific individuals in these three organizations -- particularly JuD -- that it believes to be connected to terrorist activity, so that actions could be brought against these individuals rather than against the whole organization.   3.  (S)  Aslam explained the GOP request by citing the current case before the Supreme Court of Pakistan, in which the GOP appealed a Sindh High Court decision ordering the release of Al Rashid Trust funds that the GOP had frozen following the 1267 Committee designation.  Aslam said that the GOP expects Al Akhtar Trust and JuD to eventually file similar court cases, which will shift the burden of proof of the organizations complicity with terrorist financing to the GOP.  If the GOP loses the Al Rashid Trust and other future cases, it will have no choice but to formally request that the 1267 Committee de-list the designee.  4.  (S)  The GOP faces not only this legal burden, Aslam continued; the earthquake relief work done by JuD and Al Rashid Trust has earned them high public esteem.  The GOP would be hard pressed to explain to the Pakistani people why it has imposed sanctions on these organizations unless it can publicly articulate the organizations' offenses...and back up its claims with verifiable evidence.  The GOP has kept a tight rein on these militant organizations providing relief in the earthquake zone, preventing them from engaging in any fund-raising activity  5.  (S)  According to Aslam, the GOP received no/no information on the terror finance connections of Al Rashid Trust and Al Akhtar Trust at the time of their designation by the 1267 Committee, and it presently has no/no information linking either these two groups or JuD to terrorist activity.  (Note:  In addition to pressing Aslam on this assertion during the meeting, the DCM raised the issue again in a follow-up telephone call.  Aslam remained firm that the GOP has no information tieing these three organizations to terrorist activity.  End note.)  6.  (S)  Aslam then approached the designation issue from a different angle, beginning with an overview of the GOP's policy goal of persuading militant organizations to abandon the use of violence, followed by a program to \"reintegrate\" former militants back into society, as the GOP has done with detainees released from Guantanamo Bay.    This effort is not well served by imposing terror financing sanctions on popular militant organizations (e.g., JuD), which are seen as serving  ISLAMABAD 00005070  002 OF 003   local communities.  Aslam requested that the U.S. identify to the GOP those individuals in JuD against whom it has evidence of terrorist connections and then share that evidence with the GOP for use in appropriate criminal proceedings.  7.  (S) Throughout Aslam's presentation, DCM and poloff pressed for clarification of whether the GOP would continue to implement and enforce 1267 Committee sanctions, per Pakistan's international obligations.  Aslam replied that the GOP must abide by the decisions of its domestic courts.  When asked whether the GOP believed that a militant organization's participation in earthquake relief activities obviated terror finance offenses, Aslam replied that the GOP's present concern is one of due process for the designees:  these organizations will use the legal protections available under Pakistani law to demand that the GOP defend it's implementation of terror finance sanctions.  If the GOP cannot do that, the designees will have won both a judicial victory and the fight for public opinion.  DCM telephoned Aslam after the meeting to underscore the U.S. position that Pakistan has an international obligation to implement and enforce all 1267 Committee sanctions against designated organizations, that the USG views these organizations as having taken advantage of the GOP's willingness to allow them to participate in earthquake relief operations to bolster their public image, expand their recruitment base and develop new sources of terrorist financing, and that the U.S. strongly urges that the GOP take all necessary action to end relief activities by sanctioned organizations.  8.  (S)  Comment:  Post finds much of Aslam's presentation dubious, particularly her denial that the GOP has any information linking JuD (aka LeT, an organization that has been banned domestically in Pakistan since 2002) or the others to terror finance activity.  Post requests that Department advise on the extent to which information on these organizations' terror finance links were/are available to the GOP through the 1267 Committee designation process.  In the interim, Ambassador will raise U.S objections to the substance of Aslam's demarche when he next sees the Foreign Secretary.  SIPDIS   9.  (S)  Text of the non-paper passed during Ms. Aslam's demarche are reproduced below:   (Begin text.)  Pakistan's commitment to fight terrorism, root and branch, needs no elaboration.  We are fulfilling all our international obligations flowing from UNSC resolutions which recommend specific measures against Taliban and Al Qaida organizations particularly resolution 1267 and subsequent resolutions to mprove the sanctions regime.  The sanctions are imposed in accordance with domestic laws as the relevant resolutions were adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter (Ref.SC Act of 1948).  This, however, does not end the political and legal predicament the Government has to face while explaining the rationale behind imposing sanctions to domestic audience at least against some of the organizations such as Al Rashid Trust.  Legal:  because, in the absence of incontrovertible evidence, some people view sanctions as an attempt to give ascendency to executive over judiciary.  Political:  because, again unless proof is provided to public, they view sanctions as unjustified because of the participation of certain organizations such as Al Rashid and Jamat ud Dawa in good charity work.  The case of Al Rashid Trust is pending in the Supreme Court of Pakistan.  As the Government had appealed against the decision of the Sindh High Court to release the funds of the Trust, it would, in addition to certain other domestic legislations (UNSC Act 1948), need hard evidence against the Al Rashid Trust to plead its case.  Use of UNSC Act alone may fulfill immediate legal requirement but seeking decision only on its basis may create legal and political complications mentioned earlier.  We would, therefore, require credible evidence against Al Rashid Trust, Al Akhtar Trust and Jamat-ud-Dawa for more  ISLAMABAD 00005070  003 OF 003   effective actions against them.  I would also like to explore the possibility of isolating, and, punishing only those criminal individuals (if they could be identified with evidence), who are using these organizations for terrorist activities instead of sanctioning whole organizations as per the current procedures of 1267 Committee.  These organizations would be asked to purge themselves of all identified individuals (and sanction would be imposed on them), failing which the whole organization would be sanctioned.  This would help us deal with political implications of the sanctions by maintaining transparency in the process.  (End text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/28/2006 8:54", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 005123  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/28/2015 TAGS: PK, PTER, MOPS, MASS, MCAP, PREL SUBJECT: A/S HILLEN VISIT TO PAKISTAN  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Introduction:  On his March 15-18 visit to Pakistan, A/S John Hillen and PM/RSAT Tom Canahuate met with senior Government of Pakistan (GOP) officials, as well as Pakistan's top military leadership.  Describing his role in soliciting support for USG security assistance to Pakistan from the U.S. Congress, A/S Hillen urged Pakistan's defense leaders to come to a decision soonest on the desired configuration for its purchase of F-16s.  A/S Hillen described the process by which the Administration notifies Congress of the transfer of defense assets, and counseled the Pakistanis on steps they could take to facilitate Congressional approval of the F-16 transfer.  Turning to the Global War on Terror (GWOT), A/S Hillen praised Pakistan's commitment to routing anti-Coalition militants and other extremists in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the Pak-Afghan border, and sought Pakistani perspectives on how the U.S. could best configure its security assistance to support Pakistan's security operations in the region.  Many Pakistani interlocutors raised questions regarding the expanding bilateral relationship between the U.S. and India, noting that it has led to much public speculation as to the value that Washington ascribes to the U.S.-Pakistan relationship.  A/S Hillen stated flatly that President Bush does not view our bilateral relations with India and with Pakistan as a zero sum game; he stressed that the Administration seeks a sustained, strategic relationship with Pakistan. End introduction.  National Defense College (NDC) ------------------------------  2.  (SBU) At NDC Commandant LTG Raza Muhammed Khan and his staff briefed A/S Hillen on the institution's history, mission and organization.  In a broad discussion of security issues, LTG Raza raised a number of \"irritants\" in the Pakistani-Afghanistan relationship, citing difficulties in achieving effective security cooperation along the common border and Pakistan's vulnerability vis-a-vis India's \"foreign hand,\" which he alleged is operating out of Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan.  Raza voiced his concern at the expanding U.S.-Indian relationship, saying that new Delhi received \"far more than it deserved\" during President Bush's recent visit.  A/S Hillen assured LTG Raza that although India is an important global power with whom the U.S. has a broad and complex relationship, this does not detract from the sustained and enduring partnership that the U.S. and Pakistan have built over decades.  A/S Hillen and LTG Raza agreed that NDC will play a vital role as the U.S. and Pakistan strive for a partnership of strategic vision, not simply military hardware.  Ministry of Defense (MoD) -------------------------  3.  (C)  At the MoD, A/S Hillen was received by Minister of State Zahid Hamid and Additional Secretary RDML (ret.) A.H. Chaudhary.   Hamid thanked the U.S. for its assistance following the October 8 South Asian earthquake.  A/S Hillen turned the conversation to the value of the International Military Education and Training (IMET) program, which he would like to expand for Pakistan.  When Hillen asked for an assessment of Government of Pakistan's (GOP) current thinking on F-16 aircraft purchase,  Minister Hamid said that the GOP is definitely interested in purchasing new aircraft, as well as refurbishing its current fleet and perhaps acquiring airframes through third-country buy-backs.  (Note:  Hamid was not specific as to the number of new aircraft the GOP would seek.  End note.)  Hillen encouraged the MoD to forward its desired mix of F-16s to the USG as soon as possible, so that the administration can move forward with Congressional Notification on the transfer.  Minister Hamid was pleased to  ISLAMABAD 00005123  002 OF 004   hear A/S Hillen say that he is trying to increase USG financial support for Pakistani forces currently engaged in security operations in the Tribal Areas along the Afghan border.  Recognizing Pakistan's leading role in international peace-keeping operations, Hillen also encouraged the MoD to consider offering training to African militaries interested in enhancing their conflict prevention and stabilization capacities.  Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) ---------------------------------  4.  (C) At the MFA, Chief of Protocol (and former Director General - Disarmament) Nazir Hussain briefed A/S Hillen on Pakistan's programs to enhance its non-proliferation regime. The Protocol Chief expressed gratitude to the U.S. for earthquake relief assistance, but also shared deep dismay that President Bush had resurrected the A.Q. Khan legacy by citing Pakistan's non-proliferation record as the reason the U.S. would not consider offering Islamabad a civil nuclear deal to parallel that with India.  \"Your man cut Musharraf off at the knees\" with that public comment, Hussain said, noting that his President has a tough time selling his close relationship with the U.S. to a deeply skeptical Pakistani public.  (Note:  Nazir Hussain's briefing on a special PM program will be reported septel.  End note).  Additional Secretary (Americas) Shahid Kamal told A/S Hillen that  SIPDIS Pakistan is looking forward to moving forward after the successful visit by President Bush earlier in March.  The public now has high expectations for the bilateral relationship, which presents a challenge to both sides.  When Hillen asked for one area in which Pakistan could use U.S. assistance, Kamal quickly took the opportunity to name two: education and market access for textiles.  Additional Secretary for International Organizations Tariq Usman Haider  SIPDIS asked to see A/S Hillen to discuss the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), asking whether the U.S. would be willing to discuss possible Pakistani PSI participation; A/S Hillen agreed to take the question back to his T-Bureau colleagues in Washington.  Pakistan Air Force Head Quarters --------------------------------  5.  (C) At PAF HQ March 17, Air Vice Marshall (AVM) Khalid Chaudhry (Deputy Chief of Air Staff for Operations) and Air Commodore Jamshed listened carefully as A/S Hillen outlined concerns raised by some Members of Congress regarding the pending sale of F-16s to Pakistan.  AVM Chaudhry assured A/S Hillen that Pakistan is prepared to address all USG security concerns regarding the F-16s. Citing PAF's long history of cooperation with USAF, he was perplexed that some in the U.S. are still anxious about Pakistan's security protocols for the F-16s.  Chaudhry acknowledged that the Chinese JF-17 (another staple in the PAF fleet) is simply not comparable to the F-16 in terms of quality, particularly its avionics and weapons systems. Chaudhry then contrasted PAF's F-16 fleet to the array of fighters possessed by the Indian Air Force (IAF), supported  by strong defense acquisition relationships with the U.S. and Israel.  \"The math just doesn't add up,\" Chaudhry said, admitting that the PAF has no hope of matching the IAF's resources.  Even the proposed F-16 purchase will not make that much difference in the relative imbalance of power, although it will enable Pakistan to maintain a minimum deterrent capability.  The F-16s have acquired a mythic quality in Pakistan, AVM Chaudhry admitted, taking on an inflated symbolic importance in the public imagination.  He concluded by asking A/S Hillen to ensure that the F-16 deal has enough sweeteners to appeal to the public -- a complete squadron of new F-16s, with JDAM and night-vision capability -- but not to offer the PAF things that it cannot afford.  6. (C)  Warming to his subject, Chaudhry told the delegation  ISLAMABAD 00005123  003 OF 004   that Pakistan would certainly establish adequate security protocols for the F-16s, but that at the end of the day, the U.S. simply needs to trust its partner.  He cautioned that the U.S. should not \"mock\" Pakistan by offering \"bone-yard\" F-16s as part of the sale, saying that offering to transfer mothballed aircraft only plays into the hand of President Musharraf's extremist enemies, who already find a ready audience amongst Pakistan's uneducated masses.  In contrast, Chaudhry said, the Chinese \"understand the Pakistani psyche\" and therefore \"they offer us everything,\" always on advantageous financial terms.  7. (S)  Given all that Pakistan has done for the U.S., Chaudhry said, Pakistan's military leaders have a difficult time maintaining positive attitudes toward the U.S. amongst enlisted personnel.  He cited the suseptibility of the enlisted ranks -- most of whom come from rural villages -- to the influence of extremist Islamic clerics:  \"You can't imagine what a hard time we have trying to get to trim their beards.\"  (Note: This last comment refers to the tradition of conservative Muslims to grow full beards as a sign of piety. End note.)  Chaudhry claimed to receive reports monthly of acts of petty sabotage, which he interpreted as an effort by Islamists amongst the enlisted ranks to prevent PAF aircraft from being deployed in support of security operations in the Federally Administrated Tribal Areas (FATA) along the Afghan border.  (Note:  Speaking off the record, Chaudhry told A/S Hillen that PAF aircraft are regularly called to provide air support to military and security forces when they get into tight spots in the FATA...dryily adding that Army brass and the ground forces commanders would deny it.  End note.)  Vice Chief of Army Staff (VCOAS) --------------------------------  8.  (C) VCOAS GEN Ahdan Saleem Hyat greeted A/S Hillen with thanks for American generosity and steadfast support following the October 8 earthquake, fondly describing how U.S. Chinook helicopters became a symbol of the relief effort.  He offered his condolences on the deaths of two Embassy Karachi employees in a March 2 suicide bombing, before turning to Pak-Afghan relations. Praising the Tripartite Commission, GEN Ahsan opined that increased mil-mil interaction and cooperation -- including exchanges and intelligence-sharing -- would squelch the unhelpful public bickering widely reported in the media in recent weeks. GEN Ahsan renewed a proposal first presented to GEN Abizaid and LTG Eikenberry on March 6 to incorporate Afghan National Army (ANA) troops into a joint Pak-U.S. counter-terrorism (CT) exercise scheduled for May 2006.  GEN Ahsan said that Pakistan must succeed in its current CT operations in the FATA along the Aghan border for its own sake.  Grateful for U.S. assistance thus far, GEN Ahsan said that future assistance must be more sharply focused, particularly citing Pakistan's need for top-of-the-line air assault assets equipped with night-vision capability.  Ahsan gave special emphasis to the need to minimize collateral damage in the FATA, in order not to alienate the local population whose cooperation was critical to identifying and dislodging militant forces seeking refuge in the area.  A/S Hillen responded that the U.S. fully understood the benefits of night operations in support of a counter-insurgency campaign.  He also praised GEN Ahsan's description of the GOP's integrated strategy to extend government control to the FATA, securing military gains with development assistance and political engagement.   Field Trip to Shahbaz and Mushaf Air Bases ------------------------------------------  9.  (C)  On March 16, A/S Hillen led a U.S. delegation to the Shahbaz Air Base near Jacobabad, Sindh Province, for  ISLAMABAD 00005123  004 OF 004   briefings on the Falcon Talon F-16 joint USAF-PAF exercise. After an initial greeting and briefing by Base Commander Air Commodore Athar Bukhari, A/S Hillen and delegation toured the airbase and visited with USAF F-16 ground crew and support staff. The Falcon Talon exercise is the first unified USAF/PAF exercise on Pakistani soil.  The exercises covered daytime air combat intercepts and unified strike missions. Non-flying exercise objectives covered EOD, flight safety and quality assurance.  On March 17, A/S Hillen and delegation traveled to Mushaf Air Base in Sargodha, which has been the home of Pakistan's F-16 fleet since 1983.  The delegation received a thorough briefing of security and maintenance procedures at the base before touring key facilities.  10. (U)  This cable has been cleared by A/S Hillen. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/29/2006 7:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005234  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN   ISLAMABAD 00005234  001.4 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Ed ition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)  ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE TELEGRAM. WAS RESENT UNDER DIFFERENT MRN.  ISLAMABAD 00005234  002.4 OF 002   ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE TELEGRAM CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/29/2006 7:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005235  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN   ISLAMABAD 00005235  001.4 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Ed ition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)  ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE TELEGRAM.  WAS RESENT UNDER DIFFERENT MRN.  ISLAMABAD 00005235  002.4 OF 002   ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE TELEGRAM. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/29/2006 12:52", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005307  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN  ISLAMABAD 00005307  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (C) Summary.  President Bush's March 3-4 visit to Pakistan inspired a range of opinions on the state of the US-Pakistan relationship.  Government officials, such as President Musharraf, PM Aziz, and FM Kasuri expressed satisfaction with the visit and its outcomes, including the launching of a strategic dialogue and progress on counterterrorism and defense cooperation.  Opposition parties, who are typically critical of US policy, applauded the President,s comments on democracy.  As expected, most criticism centered on a familiar sticking point for Pakistan: India.  President Musharraf and other GOP officials, however, sought to counter the widely held view that what is good for India must be bad for Pakistan.  End Summary.  GOVERNMENT POSITIVE ON US-PAKISTAN RELATIONS... --------------------------------------------- -- 2. (SBU) In public statements and private conversations following President Bush,s March visit to Pakistan, GOP officials have expressed satisfaction with the visit and its outcomes.  President Musharraf and PM Aziz have repeatedly said that the visit went as they expected, and that it strengthened Pakistan,s strategic relationship with the US and institutionalized dialogue on energy, economic relations, and defense cooperation.  President Musharraf, in particular, has led the way in trying to give the visit a positive spin. Sitting through an hour-long barrage of negative and pointed questions from eminent newspaper editors, Musharraf insisted that he was pleased that the President overnighted in Pakistan, and that he mentioned the importance of resolving the Kashmir dispute.  ...BUT CONCERNED ABOUT THE US-INDIA CIVIL NUCLEAR INITIATIVE --------------------------------------------- ------------- 3. (C) MFA officials*notably FM Kasuri and Pakistani Ambassador to the US Karamat*were initially positive about the visit, but their favorable comments were subsequently overshadowed by their criticisms of the US-India civil nuclear deal.  The MFA criticized the deal on two (mutually inconsistent) fronts, arguing on the one hand that it would destroy the NPT and on the other that in the interest of regional stability, Pakistan should get a similar deal.  On March 16, FM Kasuri told the \"Financial Times\" that \"Once this (deal) goes through, the NPT will be finished.  It's not just Iran and North Korea.  Brazil, Argentina, and Pakistan will all think differently.\" (Kasuri subsequently maintained to the Ambassador that his remarks were distorted.)  On March 17, the Foreign Ministry issued a press-release saying, \"The grant of a waiver as a special case will have serious implications for the security environment in South Asia, as well as for international non-proliferation efforts.  The objective of strategic stability in South Asia(would have been better served if the United States had considered a package approach for Pakistan and India.\"  Continuing on this track, it also stated, \"The Agreement...would only encourage India to continue its weapons programme without any constraint.  On its part, Pakistan would not accept any discriminatory treatment...Pakistan will neither be oblivious to our security requirements, nor to the needs of our economic development, which demand growth in the energy sector, including civilian nuclear power generation.8 Ambassador told PM Aziz that official comment critical of the nuclear deal was helpful to neither Pakistan nor the US. Aziz agreed.  There has been no further official word on the issue over the last week or so.  OPPOSITION WELCOMES DEMOCRACY FOCUS ----------------------------------- 4. (U)  In the days following President Bush's visit, opposition politicians who routinely criticize US policy towards Pakistan hailed President Bush,s statements on democracy.  PPP Chairperson Benazir Bhutto, former Pakistani  ISLAMABAD 00005307  002 OF 002   Ambassador to the US Syeda Abida Hussain, and Jamait-e Islami officials took the President's statement that the 2007 elections should be fair as a very positive sign.  Bhutto was particularly effusive in her praise, telling reporters that the President's statement pushing for a democratic future and fair elections reflected the sentiments of the Pakistani people.  She also praised the President for assuring Pakistanis that \"Washington,s commitment to democracy applies to America's allies as well.\"  Jamait-e Islami deputy Liaquat Baloch and other MMA leaders took the President's speech as a sign that Musharraf would have to take off his uniform immediately and hold new elections, because \"the US is watching.\"  \"GIVE US SOMETHING JUST AS GOOD\" -------------------------------- 5. (C) Despite the efforts of Pakistani and US officials to de-link the US-Pakistan and US-India relationship, many Pakistani politicians and the ordinary public want equal treatment with India.  This theme has emerged repeatedly in a drumbeat of negative editorials and articles, and in private conversations with GOP officials.  For example, NDC Commandant LTG Raza Muhammed Khan told A/S Hillen during his recent Pakistan visit that \"New Delhi received far more than it deserved\" during the President's visit.  PML Senator Asif Jatoi complained to Poloff that once India got the landmark civil-nuclear deal, \"you needed to give us something big.\"  6. (SBU) Most government officials attempted to stay positive in the face of such media criticism.  Musharraf told critics that they were not being rational, saying \"it should not bother us what the US does with India, because those relationships should be viewed independently.\"  Others, such as Ministry of Foreign Affairs Additional Secretary (Americas) Shahid Kamal have told US officials that as a result of the \"big\" deliverables given to India, the Pakistani public now has higher expectations for the US-Pakistan bilateral relationship.  He suggested that US assistance in education and increased market access for Pakistani textiles could help improve public perceptions that the US values its relationship with India more than its relations with Pakistan.  COMMENT ------- 7. (C) President Musharraf and senior leaders understand the significance of the President's visit and appreciate his comments on Kashmir and his willingness to overnight in Islamabad.  The fact that most other Pakistanis have a jaundiced view is not surprising, given decades of rivalry with India and a festering ambivalence about relations with the US.  We expect popular perceptions will change over time as we begin to put substantive content into the various elements of the composite dialogue.  As official US visitors meet with opposition figures in coming months, we will have an opportunity to put to rest any doubts regarding our commitment to democracy in Pakistan.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE46628", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/30/2006 12:46", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 005357  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, KTFN, UN SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE:  LET AMENDMENT - EMBASSY UPDATES GOP ON DESIGNATION TIMELINE  REF: A. A. STATE 46628       B. B. STATE 50397      C. C. ISLAMABAD  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (U)  This message contains action requests; please see Para. 5.  2 (S)  Post has had several opportunities in the past week to update the Government of Pakistan (GOP) on the USG intention to request that the UN 1267 Committee amend the designation of Lashkar-e-Tayyba (LET) to include Jammat-ud-Dawa (JUD) and its various aliases:  -- On March 24, DCM reaffirmed the U.S. decision to request the 1267 Committee include JUD in the LET designation in his meeting with MFA UN Director General Tasneem Aslam (Ref C);  -- On March 29, poloff advised MFA UN Director Imran Ahmad Siddiqui of the timeline for pre-notification and submission of the amendment request to the 1267 Committee (per Ref A and B);  -- On March 29, Ambassador reviewed the pre-notification and amendment request timeline with Foreign Secretary Mohammed Riaz Khan and solicited Pakistan's support and full cooperation on implementing any 1267 Committee sanctions against JUD and all other designated organizations and individuals, (per Ref A and B); and  -- On March 30, DCM reviewed the pre-notification and designation timeline during his introductory call on MFA Additional Secretary (Americas) Shahid Kamal and requested the GOP's support and vigorous implementation of all 1267 Committee terror finance sanctions (per Ref A and B).  3. (S)  The GOP has not specifically agreed or refused to support the request to amend the LET designation.  (Note: Most GOP officials appeared to view the amendment to include JuD as inevitable.  End note.)  MFA officials have, however, consistently affirmed the GOP's commitment to honor its international obligation to implement and enforce 1267 Committee sanctions against designated individuals and organizations.  4. (S)  As reported in Ref C, the MFA has formally requested that the U.S. provide specific information linking designated organizations (Al Rashid Trust, Al Akhtar Trust, JUD) to terrorist or terrorism finance activities.  This request, first raised by Tasneem Aslam on March 24, was repeated in post's MFA meetings on March 29.  5. (S)  Action Requests:  -- Post requests clarification soonest from Department as to (a) whether it can share the Ref B Background Paper (SBU) and List of JUD Aliases (SBU) with the GOP; (b) whether there is additional information that can be shared with the GOP in support of the USG request to include JUD in the 1267 Committee's designation of LET.  -- Post requests Department advise soonest (a) what information was made available to the GOP by the USG or the UN at the time of the Al Rashid Trust and Al Akhtar Trust 1267 Committee designations; (b) whether the GOP could presently access the information presented in support of the Al Rashid and Al Ahktar designations through UN channels; (c) if not available through UN channels, could the USG share the information presented to the 1267 Committee with the GOP; and (d) whether the Department or interagency has additional information that could be made available to the GOP on these two designees.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/30/2006 12:47", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005358  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  SECDEF FOR DSCA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: MASS, PK, TU SUBJECT: END-USE, RETRANSFER AND SECURITY ASSURANCES FROM PAKISTAN FOR SONOBOUYS  REF: 05 STATE 233028  1.  This message contains an action request; please see para. 6.  2.  By letter dated 18 March 2006, CAPT Muhammad Tahir, Pakistan Navy, forwarded to the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) an original End User Certificate (EUC), serial number 71/2006, signed by BG Khan Azam Khurshid, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Defence production.  3.  The text of the EUC reads as follows:  (Begin text.)  We, Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan hereby certify that Pakistan Navy has request to get the following US origin Sonobouys from Naval Attache, Embassy of the Republic of Turkey in Islamabad (Pakistan) on gratis to meet operation requirements and participation in Naval exercises with allied countries:-  S.No.     Description               Quantity 1.        AN/SSQ 41 B (Passive      250 Nos 2.        AN/SSQ-62 B (DICASS)      150 Nos 3.        AN/SSQ-77 A (VLAD)        100 Nos  Now, in reference to the provisions of United States law that require the Government of Pakistan to provide assurances to the Government of the United States of America before it may consent to the transfer of certain defence articles, hereby gives its assurances:-  (A) the Government of Pakistan shall not, unless the prior written consent of the Government of the United States has been first obtained:  (i) Permit any use of any such sonobouys or any component thereof (including technical information) by anyone not any officer, employee or agent of the Government of Pakistan;  (ii) Transfer, or permit any officer, employee, or agent of the Government of Pakistan to transfer any such sonobouys, or any component thereof (including technical information), by gift, sale or otherwise;  (iii) Use or permit the use of any such sonobouys, or any component thereof (including technical information), for purposes other than those for which provided.  (End text.)  4.  ODRP will coordinate with DSCA on forwarding the original EUC to Washington, DC.  5.  Action Request:  Post requests that Department confirm that the 18 March EUC for the sonobouy transfer satisfies USG requirements. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/31/2006 2:48", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 005381  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2016 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: AFGHAN AMBASSADOR SAYS PAK-AFGHAN ATMOSPHERICS ARE IMPROVING  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  In a March 29 conversation, Afghan Ambassador Tarzi told Ambassador that he feels that the atmosphere between Islamabad and Kabul is clearing.  On the eve of his return to Kabul for consultations, Tarzi said that he sensed that the GOP is eager to put aside the heated public rhetoric that followed President Karzai's February visit to Islamabad.  His government is also ready to move on, Tarzi said, noting that he is already making arrangements to convene the Pak-Afghan Joint Economic Commission (JEC), perhaps as early as 26-27 April.  He sees the JEC as an opportunity for an early high-level visit between the governments, a goal the Pakistani MFA shares.  What is important, Tarzi said, is that the visit is high-level and high-visibility.  Tarzi even had praise for the GOP's prompt reaction when the Afghan Consulate in Quetta was threatened by a mob protesting the execution-style deaths of 17 Pakistani nationals, whose bodies were discovered near Spin Boldak on the Afghan side of the border.  The police who responded protected the facility, while an unknown speaker addressed the crowd to urge calm, calling for good relations between the neighboring countries.  2.  (S)  Ambassador Crocker agreed that the atmosphere has improved, saying that despite the publicity surrounding the Spin Boldak incident, the GOP has been restrained in its reaction.  He also cited ISI Director General Kayani's March 29 discussions on intelligence sharing with his Afghan counterparts as a positive development.  The Ambassador also praised President Karzai's decision to commit an Afghan National Army (ANA) unit to participate in the joint U.S.-Pakistani military exercise \"Inspired Gambit\" in North West Frontier Province in May.  3.  (C)  Tarzi said that, even during the height of the bilateral tensions, he had been able to conduct the Embassy's business as usual with no hostility from his Pakistani contacts.  Now, he continued, many are going out of their way to demonstrate their interest in Afghanistan.  Vice Army Chief of Staff GEN Ahsan has gone out of his way to show that there is no ill will, Tarzi said, inviting Afghan GEN Bismullah Khan to attend his son's wedding and planning festivities in Bismullah Khan's honor at the April 19 Tripartite Commission plenary in Islamabad.  Former ISI Chief Azad Durrani has expressed an interest in visiting Kabul in the near future.  4.  (S)  Tarzi also told Ambassador Crocker that he believes that he had sorted through the confusion surrounding an Afghan Ministry of Defense paper that had been wrongly billed to the GOP as Afghanistan's National Security Strategy (NSS).  (Note:  President Musharraf expressed his irritation at the allegedly revanchist tone of this MOD paper to GEN Abizaid during their March 6 meeting.  End note.)  The Government of Afghanistan (GOA) is working on a NSS, Tarzi said, but under the auspices of the National Security Advisor's office.   The MOD paper that had been passed to the GOP was a preliminary draft written for other purposes that has no/no official standing.  Ambassador thanked Tarzi for the explanation, and urged him to convey the same message to senior GOP officials. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/31/2006 2:48", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005382  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO USAID  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2016 TAGS: PREL, EAID, ETRD, PGOV, PK, AF, PTER, PARM, KNNP SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S BILATERAL TOUR D'HORIZON WITH FOREIGN SECRETARY   SIPDIS  REF: A. A. STATE 34756      B. B. ISLAMABAD 3575      C. C. ISLAMABAD 5070      D. D. STATE 50397 AD PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  Summary:  On March 29, Ambassador called on Foreign Secretary Mohammed Riaz Khan to discuss follow-on action  SIPDIS after the March 3-4 visit by President Bush, particularly a time frame for the Foreign Secretary's Strategic Dialogue discussions with P - U/S Burns and cooperation on establishing Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs).  The Foreign Secretary confirmed that Pakistan has pledged its support for Guatemala's candidacy for the UNSC through an exchange of notes with the Guatemalan Delegation at the UN. The Ambassador noted that movement on various EXBS and pol-mil programs has slackened in recent months following MFA personnel changes and urged the Foreign Secretary to encourage his staff to actively engage on these issues.  The Ambassador noted that the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) refusal to interdict suspect materials in transit to Iran had been noted with great disappointment at the highest levels in Washington.  If a similar case arises in the future, the Ambassador said that the USG would expect greater cooperation from the GOP.  The Ambassador shared the dates that the USG would begin pre-notification of its request to amend the UN 1267 Committee designation of Lashkar-e-Tayyba (LET) to include Jammat-ud-Dawa (JUD), as well as the anticipated date that the U.S. would submit the amendment request to the 1267 Committee.  End summary.  Strategic Dialogue ------------------  2. (C)  The Foreign Secretary said that he, too, is eager to initiate the first round of the Strategic Dialogue talks with U/S Burns.  Reviewing his calendar, he indicated that he would be available to travel to WashDC April 17 - 24; April 28 - May 1; or after May 19; he hoped that some of these dates would coincide with open slots in U/S Burns' calendar. The Ambassador noted that several other bilateral consultations are on the horizons, citing the Defense Consultative Group will meet in WashDC May 1-5 and the to-be-scheduled Economic Dialogue; he asked the Foreign Secretary to consider whether these consultations should be  SIPDIS sequenced or linked in a particular fashion to maximize synergy.  The Foreign Secretary said that the GOP has tasked working groups leader to generate ideas for future dialogues on energy, science and technology, economics and education.  ROZs ----  3. (C) The Ambassador noted that issue of ROZs would receive special attention in the Strategic Dialogue meetings, saying that WashDC policy makers were considering whether to include areas of Balochistan, North West Frontier province (NWFP), the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the Pak-Afghan border and Pakistan-adminsitered Kashmir (AJK) in the zones.  USAID is ready to fund a study of how to proceed with the ROZs, but the U.S. would first like to consult with the GOP.  The Foreign Secretary agreed that it is important that the public see quick movement on the ROZs and that he confirm who the Prime Minister's Office's has tasked to manage the process (quickly disclaiming that the MFA would be in charge.)   Later in the conversation, the Foreign Secretary returned to the ROZs, saying that it would be  SIPDIS difficult to attract industries to invest in volatile areas such as the FATA.  He also expressed reservations about the requirement that Pakistani qoods must have a minimum level of  ISLAMABAD 00005382  002 OF 003   Afghan imputs to qualify for ROZ benefits, noting that a tendency toward contrariness could lead the Afghans to sign on to the ROZ concept simply to be in a position to block Pakistans's access to ROZ benefits.  EXBS ----  4. (S)  The Ambassador drew the Foreign Secretary's attention to a slowdown in bilateral interaction on EXBS, pol-mil and other programs in recent months. The Foreign Secretary attributed this to a rough transition in the Disarmament Cell following Nazir Hussain's transfer to the Protocol Office. The Ambassador said that the Embassy would contact the new leadership in the MFA's Disarmament Cell, to re-invigorate this critical area of bilateral cooperation.  Interdiction ------------  5  (S)  The Ambassador told the Foreign Secretary that senior officials in WashDC were severely disappointed that the GOP refused to interdict suspect maritime cargo scheduled to transit the Port of Karachi on March 4 en route to Iran. (Ref A and B)  The Foreign Secretary said that his government had declined the request to interdict in order \"to protect\" the Bush visit the same day -- if the GOP had acted, he said, negative public reaction would have dominated the news cycle, pushing the good news about the President's visit off the media's radar.  The Foreign Secretary stressed that Pakistan had advised the USG of its decision very quickly and had urged the U.S. to interdict the vessel itself.  He went on to reaffirm the GOP's commitment to prevent Pakistani-produced controlled materials from being exported for illicit purposes, but distinguished this from active interdiction of goods produced elsewhere transiting Pakistan.  The Ambassador reminded the Foreign Secretary that GOP statements opposing nuclear weapons proliferation -- particularly in Pakistan's immediate neighborhood -- will be put the to test should a similar case arise in the future; he expressed the hope that, if called to act, the GOP would not decline next time.  1267 Committee Designation --------------------------  6. (S)  Reminding the Foreign Secretary that the U.S. had deferred moving forward with its request to add JUD to the LET terror financing designation, the Ambassador apprised the Foreign Secretary of the current timeline for pre-notification and presentation to the UN 1267 Committee. (Ref D)  The Ambassador expressed concern over points MFA Spokesperson Tasneem Aslam raised with DCM on March 24, particularly the notion that JUD and other designated organizations should be given special consideration because of their participation in earthquake relief efforts.  On the contrary, the Ambassador continued, we have warned the GOP for months that these organizations were engaged in relief work for this express purpose, reaping the benefits of positive press, increased recruitment opportunities and an expanding financial base.  If the GOP had taken control of these aspects of the relief efforts, and channeled humanitarian-minded militants into this work as part of an organized DDR program, then perhaps Ms. Aslam would have had a point.  As it stands, the USG remains firm in its view that the GOP must take decisive action to bring the militants' relief activities to an end and to vigorously implement the anticipated 1267 Committee designation of JUD.  The Foreign Secretary replied that it is very difficult for the GOP to  SIPDIS act against the militant organizations; that it must consider tools other than coercion to persuade the militants to abandon violence; and that the GOP needs additional  ISLAMABAD 00005382  003 OF 003   information  on the links between the militants and terrorism/terrorist financing in order to explain the situation to the Pakistani people (Ref C).  The Ambassador appreciated the complexities of the situation, but again urged the GOP to ensure that all assets of designated organization have been frozen, in accord with Pakistan's obligations as a member of the UN.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06SECSTATE47580", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/3/2006 6:07", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 005537  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  H FOR BFLECK H - PLEASE PASS TO HAGEL STAFFER REXON RYU  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/28/2016 TAGS: EAID, MASS, MOPS, OVIP, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: POLITICAL SCENESETTER FOR SENATOR HAGEL  REF: SECSTATE 47580  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  1. (S) The U.S. Mission in Pakistan warmly welcomes your planned April 12-15 visit to Pakistan.  As demonstrated during President Bush's recent visit to Islamabad, both President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward Musharraf's goal of \"enlightened moderation.\" They viewed the President's visit as a landmark in the relationship and were gratified that he decided to stay overnight in Pakistan.  Your visit comes as Pakistan's leaders have survived the fallout from the Danish cartoon controversy, but remain engaged in suppressing violent separatists in Balochistan, combating al-Qa'ida and extremists in the tribal areas along the Afghan border and transitioning from earthquake relief operations to long-term reconstruction.  Robust USG participation in the earthquake relief effort has promoted a more positive public perception of the United States, but Pakistan remains a tough public diplomacy environment.  We believe that your visit will help us advance key U.S. objectives, including democratization, regional stability and progress in the global war on terror.  The Cartoon Controversy ----------------------- 2. (C) In February and early March, tens of thousands of Pakistani demonstrators took to the streets to protest the publication of the Danish cartoons.  Early rallies in Lahore and Peshawar were particularly destructive, with rampant looting and vandalism in parts of downtown Lahore and Peshawar and six protesters killed.  Although demonstrations followed throughout Pakistan (including a widely-observed nationwide strike on the day of President Bush's arrival), enhanced security measures by the Government of Pakistan (GOP)prevented any repetition of the unrestrained violence seen in February. Over time, the protests took on a greater political tone.  The outrage against the Danes and the EU still festers, fueled by opportunistic politicians who have subverted public sentiment in order to condemn the West as a whole (including the U.S.) and embarrass the Musharraf government.  3.  (C) Following President Bush's lead, your visit presents an opportunity to remind the Pakistani people that the United States understands the sentiments of the Muslim community and that, although we strongly support freedom of expression, we also believe the press should behave responsibly.  More broadly, you will have the opportunity to underscore our desire for warm relations with the Muslim world and for a sustained partnership with Pakistan as it addresses the immediate challenge of earthquake recovery and the long-term challenges of economic development.  Earthquake Relief ----------------- 4. (U) The October 8 earthquake (7.6 on the Richter scale) in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was the strongest to hit the region in over a century.  The GOP estimates that more than 73,000 individuals died in the quake, with more than 69,000 wounded and some 2.8 million survivors left homeless.  The United States has been Pakistan's most visible international partner in delivering emergency relief over the last two months.  5.  (U) The U.S. military, which has been on the ground since October 10, will conclude its relief operations on March 31. At the peak of initial relief efforts, more than 1,200 personnel and 24 helicopters provided vital transport, logistics and medical and engineering support in affected areas.  AS we have wrapped up our military relief operations, we have donated more than USD 2.5 million in medical equipment to Pakistani counterparts to ensure that they had the resources necessary to meet the medical needs of the affected community.  Our Seabee unit left behind 25 pieces of heavy construction equipment as a donation to Pakistani military engineers.  6.  (U) The U.S. military and USAID collaborated closely on the civilian relief effort, with the military providing logistics and USAID working with NGOs to deliver supplies and services in camps and villages.  USAID has provided more than USD 60 million in additional humanitarian assistance through NGOs and the United Nations, including blankets, tents, plastic sheeting and shelter kits to help the affected population make it through the harsh Himalayan winter.  In March, USAID made its first reconstruction grant of USD 15 million to rebuild  schools and hospitals.  In total, the USG has pledged USD 510 million for earthquake relief and reconstruction efforts.  The U.S. private sector is also engaged.  A consortium of CEOs (GE, Pfizer, Citigroup, Xerox and UPS) is spearheading the South Asia Earthquake Relief Fund, which has already attracted approximately USD 24 million.  Independent estimates place total U.S. private donations at over USD 130 million.  7.  (C) Our prompt and generous response has initiated a small but perceptible shift in Pakistani attitudes about the United States, improving bilateral relations at official levels.  The hand-in-glove cooperation between U.S. and Pakistani military personnel has palpably reduced suspicions at the middle and upper ranks of the Pakistani army. As we have drawn down our military presence, we have emphasized that our transition parallels the overall shift from emergency relief toward the civilian reconstruction phase of the recovery effort. Pakistanis, who have long been convinced that we are fair-weather friends, are beginning to understand that we are interested in a long-term relationship.  Democratization --------------- 8.  (C) President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007. U.S. visitors should remind their Pakistani interlocutors (particularly those in the military) of the importance our elected leaders - including President Bush and members of Congress - attach to this transition.  The government must address significant organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, but it has taken an important initial step with the March appointment of a permanent, independent election commissioner acceptable to all mainstream parties. When engaging Pakistani contacts, U.S. officials should reinforce the need for civilian control of the military and for the military's full and permanent disengagement from electoral politics.  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  Afghanistan ----------- 9.  (S) The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried that India is using its assets in Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan.  President Musharraf, his government and military leaders recognize that Pakistan must support the Karzai government as it attempts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  That said, the two leaders cannot restrain themselves from engaging in regular bouts of destructive public rhetoric in which each blames the other for not doing enough to effectively prosecute the battle against their common enemies in the tribal areas along the border.  10.  (S) As illustrated by the recent heavy fighting in North and South Waziristan, Pakistan is struggling to curb insurgent activity, challenged by rugged terrain, Pakistan border security forces' limited resources and sometimes uneven support within the Pakistani military,  Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and the Frontier Corps.  The greatest hurdle is the Government's lack of a coherent strategy in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the Afghan border.  We consistently press the GOP to move forcefully against al-Qaida, Taliban and other anti-coalition militants, while simultaneously acknowledging the significant progress Pakistan has made in countering terrorist elements since September 2001.  The recent military operations initiated in North Waziristan by Pakistan's Special Services Group, supported by Pakistan Army Aviation and 11th Corps assets, marks a new level of commitment commensurate with America expectations.  India and Kashmir ----------------- 11.  (S) President Musharraf and his senior advisors have consistently told us that they have made a strategic decision to end the militancy and even Indian officials acknowledge that the level of violence and cross-border infiltration has declined (though New Delhi attributes this to Indian security measures).  President Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in Delhi).  Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that New Delhi is not afraid to discuss pragmatic solutions to make the LOC less-relevant in people's lives, but has also chided Pakistan for holding normalization of bilateral relations hostage to a final resolution of the Kashmir dispute.  Limited measures following the October earthquake to facilitate cross-LOC travel and communication have the potential to changes the dynamic in Kashmir and may accelerate internal pressure on Islamabad and New Delhi to create additional space for interaction between Kashmiris in India and Pakistan.  12. (C)  While there has been little progress on core issues relating to Kashmir, senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue process, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for  ballistic missile launches and the opening of five bus routes between the two countries.  India and Pakistan have also after some 17 years revived the Joint Commission after some twenty years, to provide a forum for discussions on technical issues such as science and technology, information technology, telecommunications, and tourism.  The Pakistani Federal Investigation Agency and the Indian Central Bureau of Investigation recently initiated discussions aimed at promoting cross-border cooperation on human trafficking, currency counterfeiting, and illegal immigration.  13.  (S) India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue, and Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive.  President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful and mutually agreeable solution in Kashmir.  Global War on Terrorism ----------------------- 14.  (S) Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the global war on terror, including its efforts to deny al-Qaida and other extremist elements safe haven in Pakistan's untamed tribal areas along the Afghan border. Following the GOP's decision to extend central government control into the FATA (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  The Pakistan military has suffered over 1000 casualties in the FATA, with particularly heavy fighting during the first week of March, when militants occupied a key town in North Waziristan.  Since December, the security situation, especially in Waziristan, has deteriorated, forcing the GOP to rethink its strategy. Musharraf has articulated a three-pronged approach comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past. We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the FATA and to provide training and rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  15.  (C) In the aftermath of the July 7 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on terrorist/extremist organizations in Pakistan to much public fanfare.  We are still assessing whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run.  Initial law enforcement actions targeted the usual suspects--conservative clerics and Islamist politicians--prompting a strong popular backlash, with conservatives decrying the focus on Islamists.  Ultimately, the government released most detainees and watered down regulations intended to provide transparency on madrassa operations.  We have repeatedly pressed senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of key terrorist and extremist groups, including those involved in earthquake relief efforts in northern Pakistan.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against madrassas that support, recruit for or shelter these organizations.  Balochistan ----------- 16.  (S) Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling caution and a negotiated settlement that addresses Baloch concerns, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity to be suppressed. At the moment, the pendulum appears ready to swing toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the FATA and in the war on terror.  Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan, in earthquake relief and in managing domestic unrest over the cartoons.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/3/2006 14:36", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005596  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT'S CHARM OFFENSIVE LEAVES MANY BALOCH UNIMPRESSED   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d.   1.  (S)  Summary:  While sporadic engagements continue between Baloch nationalists and military and Frontier Corps units, the Pakistan government has recently announced a series of political and economic initiatives to address some of Balochistan's long-standing grievances, including promises of more federal jobs and more money.  Based on initial soundings among journalists, NGO reps and political figures, the grassroots response to the government's initiatives ranges from the dismissive to the (very) cautiously optimistic.  It will be a long time before these kinds of announcements deliver a bankable political dividend; despite government hopes,they will not drive a wedge between renegade Baloch sardars and their supporters. However, they may serve the government's broader interest by convincing the Pakistani public that continued resistance by the sardars is unreasonable.  End Summary.  The Charm Offensive -------------------  2.  (U)  Even as clashes continue between security forces and Baloch tribesman, the government has announced in recent weeks a set of political and economic initiatives for Balochistan designed to address long-standing Baloch grievances.  --  On March 17, Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, President of the ruling Muslim League party announced that people from other provinces working in the Baloch port city of Gwadar would not be allowed to vote or contest in elections for 15 years. (Note: this is designed to address a Baloch concern that recruitment of Punjabis to work at the Gwadar Port would change the demographics and political affiliation of the area.)  -- On March 26, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz visited Quetta and announced that the government would create 30,000 public sector jobs in provincial departments, including the police and Frontier Corps.  (Note: the Baloch complain that they are significantly underrepresented in such jobs.)  He also underscored that a National Finance Commission (NFC) award announced in January by President Musharraf, would give the province an additional Rs 6.0 billion (about $100 million).  --  On March 29, President Musharraf used the inauguration of a $1.7 million gas supply project in Gwadar to underscore the government's commitment to development in Balochistan.  He urged the Ports and Shipping Minister to give preference to Baloch in hiring and announced that the Government would provide $50 million to be distributed to the Nazims of Balochistan's 29 districts to finance development projects. He pledged that he would monitor progress personally.  The Naysayers -------------  3.  (C)  The reaction of Balochis has been predictably mixed, with many Baloch political figures dismissing the announcements as window dressing, and others -- principally independent journalists -- taking a cautiously optimistic posture.  Baloch nationalists, including Chairman of the Baloch National Movement Ghulam Mohammad, and Jamhoori Watan Party Information Secretary Amanullah Kandarani insist that the announcements are a fraud and that if the government is serious it should withdraw the army from Dera Bugti and Kohlu and release Baloch prisoners.  4.  (C)  Former Chief Secretary of Balochistan Hakim Baloch told PolCounselor that the core issue is the right of the local population to have a say in provincial affairs and rights to Balochistan's land and resources.  Sending the Prime Minister to \"directly distribute checks\" actually exacerbated the Baloch sense of powerlessness and frustration.  Moreover, he anticipated that most Baloch would view the government's announcements as \"eyewash\" because the government had a very poor record of keeping its promises.  5.  (C)  Ishaq Baloch, Central Information Secretary of the Baloch National Party said that while the party welcomed the  ISLAMABAD 00005596  002 OF 003   announcements, it remained skeptical.  Musharraf had visited Gwadar three years ago and announced the establishments of a university and polytechnical institute, but so far nothing had materialized.  People would not be satisfied until concrete steps were taken.  \"We do not want jobs or special announcements,\" he added, \"just give us what the constitution says: a quota of 5.3 percent in all federal services.\"  He claimed that out of 40,000 people employed in Wah Cantonment, only two were Baloch.  Ultimately, the only lasting solution was political: Islamabad should act as a \"federating center,\" not a \"governing center.\"  A PML politician, Sardar Wazir Ahmed Jogezai, offered the same assessment .  Three years ago Musharraf had promised an amnesty on agricultural loans, but to this day Baloch farmers were still paying off their loans with interest.  People would not be satisfied until there were free and fair elections and had a government of their own choosing.  6.  (C)  Sher Ali Mazari, an Islamabad-based relation of Nawab Bugti and a regular Embassy contact, also doubted that the announcements would have an impact.  First, the Baloch would expect that given the level of corruption in the provincial bureaucracy, little of the promised money would reach them.  Second, ongoing military operations had threatened or displaced Baloch populations in 8 districts. He estimated that there had been 600 civilian casualties to date, with up to 200,000 thousand people displaced. (Comment: in post's judgment these number appear significantly inflated. End Comment.) Third, ordinary Balochis continued to experience regular indignities at the hands of Punjabis.  He estimated that there were 300-550 checkpoints in Balochistan, manned by the Frontier Corps or other services.  \"If you are a Baloch, going from Karachi to Quetta, you are taken off the bus several times and harassed by people who don't speak your language,\" he explained.  7.  (S)  Mazari concluded that the initiatives would have no major impact and confided that senior figures in Islamabad agree, citing by name NSA Tariq Aziz, and Muslim League leaders Chaudhry Shujaat and Mushahid Hussain (strictly protect).  He had met each of them within the last two weeks, he said, and had seen Aziz the previous day (March 30). While each of them viewed the economic and political initiatives as positive, they also considered them insufficient and worried that they were being undercut by recourse to the military option.  (Note: Mazari reported that Aziz was concerned that Musharraf was not getting good information from his Director General of Military Intelligence.  Aziz had confided to Mazari that the DGMI advised Musharraf that only 3 percent of Baloch people supported the Sardars, that the whole of Balochistan was pleased that Musharraf was \"sorting out\" the Sardars and that even the Baloch nationalist Dr. Hayee Baloch was pleased with Musharraf's vigorous stance.  Mazari had told Aziz that all three assertions were preposterous and had arranged a meeting for Aziz with Dr. Baloch at his own home, where Baloch told Aziz this directly. End Note.)  The Cautious Optimists ----------------------  8.  (C)  In contrast to Baloch political figures, a number of journalist contacts and NGO representatives familiar with Balochistan were cautiously optimistic.   Toseef Saba, Editor of the paper Nara-I-Haq admitted that Baloch apprehensions were justified in view of previous unfulfilled promises. He said he worried that people around Musharraf were \"spoiling his good intentions,\" but nonetheless he had heard the speeches of Musharraf and Shaukat Aziz and was convinced that they were sincere.  \"Let's see what happens now,\" he concluded.  9.  (C)  Another journalist, Shazada Zulfiqar, reports that he met last week with nationalist Sardars Nawab Akbar Bugti and Baloch Marri and that both were optimistic about prospects for negotiations with the government.  He was also heartened by the visits of Musharraf and Aziz to Balochistan, which he interpreted as signs that they were under pressure from the people of Balochistan.  Rahat Malik, a Baloch political analyst, believed the senior visits and announcements had been welcomed by the Baloch people and he  ISLAMABAD 00005596  003 OF 003   expected tensions would begin to ease within a month.  He reported rumors that Nawab Bugti was ready to negotiate a settlement.  10.  (C)  A Program officer with a microcredit NGO active in Balochistan acknowledged that the government had been very slow to deliver on past promises, but he was hopeful that this time it would be different.  He gave Musharraf the credit for restarting the Saindak mineral extraction project in Balochistan and for building dams in the province.  These projects might not show results for years, but from his vantage working on micro-credit he had already seen measurable economic improvements even in remote areas of Balochistan.   Yes, most Balochis were probably skeptical, he judged, but the government had an opportunity to prove them wrong.  Comment -------  11.  (C)  The government's pursuit of a two-track policy -- using sticks with the Baloch separatists and carrots with the broader Baloch population -- is sensible, but the missteps and broken promises of the past work against the strategy. It will be years before the Baloch people see the jobs and improved living standards that could overcome their skepticism about the government's intentions. Given the comparative backwardness of the province, it will be many more years (if ever) before the Baloch people are educationally and economically on an equal footing with other provinces.  Restoring stability in the short term would require directly engaging the renegade sardars and far-reaching political steps to give the Baloch people a greater say in provincial affairs and greater control over the province's resources.  Although the announcement of these economic initiatives will have limited impact in Balochistan, it may serve the government by convincing other Pakistanis that Islamabad has made a credible effort, laying the groundwork for possible military action. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE52643", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/5/2006 4:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005723  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR ISN/MNSA, ISN/RA, VCI/NA, DOD/ATSD/NCB (DR. KLEIN), DTRA/RD (DR. PETE NANOS AND DR. DON LINGER) DOD FOR OSD/ISP (PETER FLORY) DOE FOR NNSA/NA-1 (AMB. LINTON BROOKS AND DR. JOHN HARVEY)  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PARM, PREL, KTBT, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  NEVADA TEST SITE  REF: STATE 52643  On April 3, poloff delivered reftel notice of schedule June 2006 non-nuclear test detonation at the Nevada Test Site to MFA (Americas) Director Diyar Khan, with the request that he share the notice with the MFA's Disarmament Cell and other interested GOP agencies.  Poloff requested Khan to contact the Embassy if the Government of Pakistan had additional questions regarding this test detonation. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE47574", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/5/2006 4:38", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005724  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, UN, PK, SNAR SUBJECT: GOP WILL CONSIDER U.S. CANDIDATE FOR INCB  REF: A. STATE 47574       B. ISLAMAMBAD 1213  On March 29, Poloff presented MFA Director (UN) Imran Ahmed Siddiqui the Ref A demarche in support of the U.S. candidates, Ambasador Melvyn Levitsky, for a term on the International Narcotics Control Board.  Siddiqui listened attentively and replied that Pakistan would give Ambassador Levitsky's candidacy full consideration.  Siddiqui said that he was not aware of any other candidate that Pakistan might support for this position, but that this was a matter that would be managed by Pakistan's UN Mission. He said that he would forward the information on Ambassador Levitsky's nomination to his colleagues in New York. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD4386", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/5/2006 13:09", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005767  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/04/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK, PGOV, PTER, IN SUBJECT: YASIN MALIK TELLS KASHMIRI MILITANTS \"GIVE PEACE A CHANCE\"  REF: ISLAMABAD 4386  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S) Introduction:  Srinagar-based Kashmiri separatist leader Yasin Malik has told post that he has used his extended March-April 2006 visit to Pakistan to reach out to Kashmiri militant leaders, counseling them to lay down their arms and give the peace process a chance.  In between highly-publicized addresses to the Pugwash Conference (March 7-8, Islamabad) (reftel), the World Social Forum (March 24-25, Karachi) and an International Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution (IIPCR) seminar of conflict resolution in Kashmir (April 3, Islamabad) and meetings with high-level Government of Pakistan (GOP) officials, Malik balanced his assessment that the time for armed struggle has ended with a call for India and Pakistan talk to the militants directly, giving them a role in the peace process.  Malik's message, which coincided with rumors that the GOP is tightening the screws on the Kashmiri militants, may be gaining ground with key militancy leaders.   End introduction.  GOP Tightening the Purse Strings? ---------------------------------  2.  (S)  Malik's early March arrival in Pakistan coincided with press reports and rumors circulating in Islamabad  that the ISI had summoned the leaders of the Kashmiri militancy for a March 8 meeting in which the GOP thanked the militants for their struggle, but then told them to lay down their arms and give the bilateral peace process a chance.  Several POL contacts confirmed that such a meeting occurred; the militant leaders responded to the orders to stand down and cuts in their GOP-subsidies by staging a ten-day protest, refusing to leave the safe house in which the March 8 meeting took place.  Although the details varied, most accounts agreed on the basic message:  that the time has come for the militants to stop the violence, to allow space for  President Musharraf and Prime Minister Singh to move forward with peace initiatives.  3. (S)  Mohammed Rafiq Dar, Secretary General - Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF - Yasin Malik branch), offered the most detailed description of the meeting and its aftermath. Dar, who was shepherding Malik's visit to Pakistan,  said that the confusion amongst the UJC leaders following the March 8 meeting created an opening for Malik to advocate a cease fire.  For example, Dar said that Malik held several conversations with Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM) leader Mohammed Yusuf Shah (aka \"Salahuddin\" or \"Syed Salahuddin,\" a heavy-hitter in the UJC), who said that he found himself joining the strike simply out of comradeship, swept along as the other militants reacted impulsively to the GOP's message.   HM:  On Board, or Not? ----------------------  4. (S)  Malik and Dar told poloffs that subsequent conversations with the HM leader reinforcing the message to stop the violence and support the peace process led to Salaluddin's public statement, reported in the \"Daily Times\" on March 31, that \"not only HM but the entire militant leadership would consider (a) truce if the Indian government acknowledges the disputed and tripartite nature of the Kashmir issue.\"  Saying that the dialogue between New Delhi and the moderate All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) leadership in recent months has so far failed, Salahuddin said that armed confrontation would automatically recede as serious dialogue process moves forward.\"   (Note:  The syntax of Salahuddin's remark suggesting that the militancy would naturally die off if only the militants were given a seat at the table indicates that it was lifted straight from Malik's talking points, which paraphrase Preseident Musharraf's own thinking. End note.)  5.  (U)  Two days later, the April 2 edition of the Daily Times reported on HM spokesperson deriding the peace process and the Kashmiri politicians (i.e., the APHC) who had joined  ISLAMABAD 00005767  002 OF 002   it.  The article quoted an HM press statement as saying that mujahideen would only encourage a dialogue process that focuses on Kashmiri self-determination. Interestingly, the article quoted complaints from an unnamed senior HM official that \"for the past two or three years, they (the Pakistani government) have withdrawn all sorts of support from us and recently, we received messages that there should be no more cross border movement.\"  6.  (S)  Despite the back-sliding in the April 2 HM statement, during a brief exchange on the margins of the IIPCR seminar on April 3, Malik and Dar reaffirmed to poloff that Salahuddin is on board with the move toward a cease fire...and that he is in a position to help Malik bring other UJC leaders along.  Comments --------  7.  (S) As celebrated Kashmiris moderates like Malik and APHC leader Mirwaiz Umar Farooq (who also stayed on for a week of public appearances and official meetings following the World Social Forum) have traveled across the LOC with some frequency in the past year, their dialogue with the Pakistani public has drawn out common threads: a call for all parties -- including the Kashmiri militants -- to renounce the use of violence; support for President Musharraf's initiatives for pursuing the peace process; and insistence that Kashmiri voices (including the militants) be included in the peace process. (Note:  Malik advocated the \"Nagaland model\" as instructive in all of his conference presentations.  End note.)  Aside from these themes, however, what has been equally apparent to Pakistan observers is the failure of Kashmiri leaders to come to a consensus as to who speaks for Kashmir, who will get the seat at the table.  For example, Malik's vision of a trilateral peace process is a far cry from ecumenical, including hard-core militants but excluding \"pro-India\" Kashmiris such as Omar Abdullah.  8.  (S)  Both Malik and Dar were eager to update poloffs on their campaign to promote the Kashmir peace process and build a constituency for Malik's vision of the way forward, with a trilateral dialogue that includes direct talks with Kashmir militants.  They took pains to note that, when confronted with popular disappointment that the Kashmir dispute did not receive greater visibility during the recent POTUS visit, Malik defended President Bush's remarks calling for a resolution acceptable to all parties and endorsing the U.S. preference for \"quiet diplomacy\" as the right choice.  Their openess with poloffs, and repeated endorsements of behind-the-scenes U.S. facilitation of the peace process, reflect in equal measure Malik's interest in building a constituency for his primacy amongst moderate Kashmiri leader and his efforts to persuade militants to give peace a chance.  Malik and Dar have other reasons to cultivate USG support -- Malik plans to travel to New York in a few weeks for medical treatment; Dar continues to hope for a positive adjudication of his pending visa application so that he can accompany Malik on his trip.  9.  (S)  Malik's visit offered poloffs an unusual opportunity to assess GOP assurances of a clamp down on the Kashmiri militancy.  Malik and Dar monitor the militants closely; their confirmation that Kashmiri militants are chafing under the GOP clamp down and that some militancy leaders are inclined to tow the line, is encouraging.  The minimal public controversy surrounding Musharraf's Kashmir policy suggests that he has largely succeeded in changing the terms of reference.  Whereas Pakistanis have historically seen the conflict as a matter of Pakistani's national claim to Kashmir, it is increasingly viewed here as a matter of Kashmiri rights.  Recent visits by Malik, the Mirwaiz and even Omar Abdullah (who praised Musharraf's initiaves following the President's meeting with Pugwash participants) are reinforcing this new perspective.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE53490", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2006 1:56", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 005787  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, PKMN, PHUM, PREL SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR G/TIP GAYATRI PATEL  REF: STATE 53490  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Gayatri Patel from April 9 to April 14.  Post also does not object to Consulate Lahore granting post clearance.  The purpose of the visit is gather additional information on the GOP's anti-trafficking efforts.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Political Officer Mohammed Motiwala.  He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Cell: 0300-501-2202.  3.  Control officer will meet visitor upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad.  Transportation will be provided to the airport on the day of departure.  Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  4.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  5. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  6.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  7.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  8.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section,  ISLAMABAD 00005787  002 OF 004   or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  9.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  10.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  11. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the  ISLAMABAD 00005787  003 OF 004   following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance  ISLAMABAD 00005787  004 OF 004   either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2006 4:51", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005822  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2016 TAGS: ENRG, MNUC, PGOV, PK, IN, PREL SUBJECT: A/S BOUCHER AND PAKISTANI FM KASURI DISCUSS U-S INDIA CIVIL NUCLEAR INITIATIVE   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d.  1.  (C) Summary: In an April 4 meeting with visiting SCA Assistant Secretary Boucher, Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri repeated Pakistan's request that the U.S. consider a \"package deal\" on civil nuclear cooperation that would include Pakistan as well as India. At a minimum, the U.S. should choose its words carefully to hold open the possibility that Pakistan might be included in the future. He complained that a deal that excluded Pakistan would undermine goodwill generated by U.S. earthquake assistance and contribute to a perception that the U.S. was an unreliable ally. Kasuri also expressed concern that the deal would indirectly bolster India's strategic nuclear program. A/S Boucher affirmed the U.S. commitment to Pakistan and stressed that the U.S. would deal with India and Pakistan based on their distinct needs (with Pakistan receiving some benefits not offered to India).  He reiterated the U.S. conviction that the Civil Nuclear Initiative would lead to more power plants, not more weapons. End Summary.  2.  (C) Kasuri noted that the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative had generated significant domestic criticism in Pakistan.  The Pakistan Government had waited a decent interval before voicing its concerns that the Initiative was not a package deal (i.e., extending to both India and Pakistan).  3.  (C) Kasuri expressed concern that the deal with India would erode the goodwill that had been generated by U.S. earthquake assistance and feed into a long-standing Pakistani perception that the U.S. was an unreliable friend.  People felt \"let down\" he said, and they worried that history was repeating itself.  Kasuri suggested \"changing the language\" used to describe U.S. reservations about a similar nuclear initiative with Pakistan.  He recommended latching onto Secretary Rice's formulation \"for the time being\" and  SIPDIS regretted Energy Secretary Bodman's statement that such an initiative with Pakistan \"was not possible.\"  4.  (C) A/S Boucher responded that the relationship with Pakistan was very important to the United States and that Pakistan's success as a moderate, democratic nation was a top administration priority.  The depth of U.S. commitment had already been amply demonstrated diplomatically, financially and in terms of personal relations among the leaders.  With respect to perceptions of the President's visit, Pakistanis should stop to consider that Pakistan had also received deliverables that India had not, such as a range of educational initiatives and trade initiatives, including the Reconstruction Opportunity Zones.  The intent of dehyphenation was that each country's particular needs should be addressed.   Nor was the United States oblivious to Pakistan's security concerns, A/S Boucher continued, recalling how India had earlier reacted (negatively) to the granting of Major Non-NATO Ally status to Pakistan.  5.  (C) A/S Boucher observed that there are strong arguments to counter concerns raised by the non-proliferation community.  As a consequence of the agreement, India's available facilities to produce enriched fuel for weapons would be halved. Kasuri responded by expressing concern that the agreement would permit India to use all of its domestically produced fuel for weapons once it could import fuel for power generation.  Boucher replied that this argument would only hold if availability of fuel were a genuine constraint on India's weapons program, which it was not; in any case, nations habitually put their security concerns foremost.  If there were a trade-off between weapons and energy, weapons would prevail.  The U.S. had analyzed the Initiative carefully and was convinced that it would lead to more power plants, not more weapons.  6.  (C) Kasuri countered by observing that the same logic should apply to Pakistan.  What was achieved by denying Pakistan access to nuclear energy?  By 2030, Pakistan would be the fourth largest country in the world (in terms of population), and without cleaner fuel there would be implications for the global environment.  Pakistan understood the damage done by AQ Khan (though it chafed at being repeatedly reminded), but how could it now move forward?  7.  (C) A/S Boucher underscored that the United States was a  ISLAMABAD 00005822  002 OF 002   long-time champion of the NPT and non-proliferation regime. Thus it was not a question of why Pakistan was being denied the nuclear option.  It was rather a question of why India was uniquely qualified, and the U.S. saw only one set of circumstances that merited this exception.  8.  (C) Note: the nuclear power issue also came up in a subsequent meeting, reported separately, that the A/S held with Foreign Secretary Khan.  Khan argued that the initiative was a \"missed opportunity\" for a package deal that would have included Pakistan, and that instead it had created an \"optic of discrimination.\"  Pakistan had a case, he said, and would continue to press it.  End Note.  9.  (U) This cable has been cleared by A/S Boucher. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD5070|06ISLAMABAD5357|06ISLAMABAD5382|06STATE52795", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2006 12:52", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 005887  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/04/2016 TAGS: PREL, KTFN, PTER, ETTD, PK, EFIN SUBJECT: TERROR FINANCE: INFORMATION DELIVERED ON 1267 DESIGNATIONS  REF: A. STATE 52795      B. ISLAMABAD 5357      C. ISLAMABAD 5382      D. ISLAMABAD 5070  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  On April 5, Poloff delivered Ref A talking points and background papers on Laskhar-e-Tayyba (LET) and Al-Akhtar Trust to MFA (UN) Director Imran Siddiqui.  Poloff pressed Siddiqui of the importance the U.S. places on full and vigorous implementation of UN 1267 Committee terror finance sanctions, regardless of legal challenges filed by designated entities in a member country's domestic courts.  Poloff also suggested that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) refine its request for releasable information on designated entities such as JUD, Al-Akhtar Trust and Al-Rashid Trust, specifying areas in which it has factual gaps in its own information. Poloff also asked Siddiqui whether the GOP would support the coming U.S. request to the 1267 Committee to amend the LET designation to include Jamaat-ud-Dawa and its aliases.  2.  (S)  Siddiqui thanked poloff for the two background papers and said that the GOP would follow-up on the suggestion to submit more focused requests for information on these designated entities.  Reaffirming the GOP's commitment to combating terrorism, he said that all 1267 Committee sanctions have been fully implemented against LET, Al-Akhtar Trust and Al-Rashid Trust and that they remain in effect, regardless of ongoing challenges in Pakistan's domestic courts.  Siddiqui commented on the public opposition to the GOP's implementation of terror finance sanctions, which are popularly perceived as having a foreign genesis; in the GOP's view, this widespread public perception makes the government's efforts to persuade Islamists to turn away from violence significantly more challenging.  3.  (S)  Comment:  Regarding Department's concern raised in Raf A, para 3, post does not believe that the GOP misunderstands the nature of international legal obligations under UNSCR 1267. To the contrary, the GOP fully understands its obligation to implement 1267 Committee terror finance sanctions.  Its request for information (Ref B) related specifically to its need to respond to domestic legal challenges by designees. These domestic court cases have the potential to rile Pakistani public opinion that is already largely antagonistic to designations, which are viewed at the grassroots level as unwarranted attacks on Muslim charitable organizations.  An offer of practical assistance on legal strategies for responding to domestic challenges to 1267 Committee terror finance sanctions, such as consultations with DOJ attorneys handling similar cases in the U,S., might boost the GOP's appetite for proactive measures against designated entities. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2006 13:39", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005903  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2016 TAGS: PREL, IN, AF, PK, IR SUBJECT: A/S BOUCHER DISCUSSES REGIONAL ISSUES WITH PAKISTANI FM KASURI AND FOREIGN SECRETARY KHAN   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.  1.  (C) Summary.  SCA Assistant Secretary Boucher reviewed a range of regional issues in separate April 4 discussions with Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri and Foreign Secretary Khan.  Kasuri and Khan were optimistic on relations with India, taking heart from PM Singh's recent speech in Amritsar and the prospect of progress on Siachen and Sir Creek in advance of a possible visit by Singh in coming months.  Khan emphasized the need for progress on the core issue of Kashmir.  Kasuri and Khan underscored that Pakistan wanted stability in Afghanistan, but expressed frustration that Pakistan is criticized abroad for not doing enough against the Taliban while at home it is viewed as serving as an American stooge.  On Iran, A/S Boucher underscored the need for the international community to stand together in pushing Iran to abide by its commitments. Khan agreed that Pakistan should do more to build relations with Central Asian states. A/S Secretary Boucher's discussions of the Strategic Dialogue and of the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative are reported in septels.  End Summary.  India/Kashmir -------------  2.  (C) Kasuri underscored that he was a believer in the Indo-Pak peace process, which Pakistan was pursuing out of self-interest.  Settling Kashmir would remove a significant factor underlying Islamic extremism in the region and would help Pakistan achieve its objective of becoming a moderate, democratic Moslem state.  3.  (C) There had already been significant progress on a number of fronts, Kasuri said, and there was \"an even chance\" the parties could resolve the longstanding disputes over Siachen and Sir Creek.  Kasuri welcomed Indian PM Manmohan Singh's recent speech in Amritsar, especially his call for \"practical and pragmatic\" solutions -- words that Musharraf had also used.  He noted that Musharraf was now interacting with a range of Kashmiri representatives -- including pro-Indian ones -- and that these Kashmiri voices were now putting pressure on India.  He expected that PM Singh might visit Pakistan in coming months, possibly to finalize deals on Siachen and Sir Creek.  4.  (C) A/S Boucher explained that as the U.S. looks to promote broad regional markets in central Asia, it views India as a destination.  Kasuri responded that this was \"no problem\" -- Pakistan had crossed that bridge in the context of discussions over the Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline. Boucher also noted that the U.S. is seeking observer status in SAARC.  5.  (C) A/S Boucher noted U.S. support for a strategic restraint regime between Pakistan and India.  Kasuri agreed, saying that Pakistan had sought to include missiles in the talks, and remained ready for that.  Pakistan favored strategic restraint, he said.  6.  (C) A/S Boucher stressed that, the U.S. wanted to be helpful on Kashmir.  President Bush had mentioned Kashmir in the U.S. prior to his visit as well as in India and in Pakistan.  This was the moment to move forward: President Musharraf had advanced ideas, India was looking for \"practical and pragmatic\" approaches; Prime Minister Singh was interested in a soft border.  7.  (C) Echoing Kasuri, Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan said there had been significant progress with India in the Composite Dialogue, but not enough movement on the key issues, especially Kashmir.  Trade with India was opening up as \"negative lists\" continued to shrink; however, even with lowered tariffs, Pakistan's most competitive exports had low profit margins and were priced out of the Indian market.  8.  (C) Khan confirmed that there were differences with India over transit trade with Afghanistan.  India wanted a land route to Afghanistan and Central Asia, but it was an issue that needed to be looked at in an \"overall perspective\"  ISLAMABAD 00005903  002 OF 003   taking into account the lack of progress on \"the issues\" (i.e., primarily Kashmir).  Pakistan did allow one-way transit trade from Afghanistan to India, and on a case by case basis it had allowed some Indian humanitarian goods to transit to Afghanistan.  9.  (C) Khan was encouraged by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's mention of \"consultative mechanisms\" in his Amritsar speech, but said there was limited progress on the ground. Pakistan had hoped for more freedom of movement across the Line of Control, and continued to hope for progress towards demilitarization of the area.  It was important for the Kashmiris to see real change.  Pakistan had hoped India would consider redeploying out of Kashmiri population centers; if it didn't work, Indian forces could always return.  If India wanted symmetry, Pakistan would \"thin out\" troops and close camps on its side of the Line of Control.  10. (C) Khan said the ball was in India's court on Siachen. In his view, the dispute would be resolved if India could agree to a demilitarized zone on the glacier.  The next step on Sir Creek was to conduct a joint survey once there was agreement on the extent of the area to be surveyed.  Afghanistan -----------  11.  (C) Foreign Minister Kasuri complained that Pakistan was being criticized on all sides.  The Afghans and the western press accused Pakistan of playing a \"double game\" and not really going after the Taliban.  Pakistanis meanwhile accused their leaders of being U.S. stooges, taking and inflicting casualties needlessly.   Kasuri asked that the United States make clear that in its assessment Pakistan is not playing a double game.  12.  (C) A/S Boucher observed that while it might not be possible to satisfy the New York Times, both the Administration and Congress understood what Pakistan was doing and were strongly committed to the relationship.  It was important that people in both countries understand that the U.S. and Pakistan were cooperating in a broad range of areas.  The Administration had already been clear that no country has captured more Al Qaida or lost more people doing so than Pakistan.   The public needed to understand that dangerous people were moving back and forth across the border, posing a threat to all parties, and that the solution was to help both countries work cooperatively to extend their control in the border region.   In addition to words, however, both countries must take tangible steps to work together in the Tripartite Commission and other fora to advance common objectives, including customs administration, economic development and counter-narcotics.  13.  (C) Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan stressed that Pakistan wanted stability in Afghanistan, but that the fragmentation among ethnic groups and regions created significant challenges.  Afghan Pashtuns were \"ruffled,\" though it helped that Karzai was Pashtun himself. Much was at stake for Pakistan, he explained, because while Afghanistan might have 10-13 million Pashtuns, Pakistan had 32 million, including many Afghan refugees.  14.  (C) Speaking frankly, Riaz Khan said that Pakistan was tired of being told \"do more, do more\" to stabilize the region.  It had already lost hundreds of troops.  \"What more do you want us to do? Strafe villages?\" The tribal areas would not change overnight, he added, because extremism was a mindset.  Pakistan was also eager to work with Afghanistan in combating narcotics, Khan said, suggesting that legalizing some poppy cultivation might help.  A/S Boucher expressed caution about the legalization option, given Afghanistan's limited institutional capacity to execute a strictly limited program, but said he was encouraged that for the first time Afghanistan was implementing all the elements of its counternarcotics strategy, including eradication, interdiction and alternative livelihoods.  15.  (C) As he had with Foreign Minister Kasuri, A/S Boucher  ISLAMABAD 00005903  003 OF 003   noted that Afghanistan was interested in establishing a strategic level dialogue with Pakistan to address common problems in the border region -- as had Kasuri, Khan agreed.  Central Asia --------------  16.  (C) Khan reported that he had been one of Pakistan's first Ambassadors in Central Asia, serving in Kazakhstan in 1992. At the time, turbulence in Afghanistan had been a physical barrier to relations and a political barrier, after Pakistan was \"credited\" with supporting the Taliban and other Islamic groups that were viewed with misgivings in Central Asia.  There was clearly potential to expand relations given that Pakistan offered access to the Arabian Sea.   Pakistan no longer had many students from Central Asia, Khan said, especially now that foreign madrassa students were being expelled.   Khan agreed with A/S Boucher that Pakistan should consider offering scholarships to Central Asian students, and that there was much Pakistan could offer in terms of exposure to business, journalism, public policy, economic reform and a sense of democracy.  Iran ----  17.  (C) A/S Boucher told Khan that it was important for Iran to get the message that there is unity in the international community.  Following the Security Council statement, Iran had 30 days to \"rectify the problem;\" it would be constructive if Pakistan could use any opportunity to underscore that message.  Khan responded that Pakistan had been reminding Iran of its obligations, but Iran insisted that it was not weaponizing.  A/S Boucher repeated that Iran had 30 days.  Iran's behavior was \"highly offensive\" across the board, he added.  It was violating its commitments, funding terrorists, opposing the Middle East peace process and interfering in Iraq. Iran needed to hear that it was time for them to honor commitments they had voluntarily taken on themselves.  18.  (C) Assistant Secretary Boucher has cleared this message. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE51776", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/7/2006 4:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005931  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK, KPKO, UN, MASS SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: POSSIBLE GOP TROOP CONTRIBUTION TO UN DARFUR MISSION  REF: STATE 51776  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C)  On April 5, poloff presented reftel demarche points to MFA (UN) Director Imran Siddiqui.  Siddiqui said that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) was aware of the text of UNSCR 1663, but had not yet received a request from UN/DPKO to contribute troops or logistical support for a Darfur peacekeeping operation (PKO).  Siddiqui said that he was not aware of any diplomatic sensitivities that would lead the GOP to decline to participate in a UN-led Darfur PKO, but that he could not speak to whether Pakistan's military services are in a position to add this PKO to the many others in which they are already serving.  Siddiqui said that the MFA would circulate reftel points to the appropriate GOP agencies to initiate an interagency discussion to determine whether the GOP would contribute to the Darfur UN mission.  2.  (C)  Post's Office of the Defense Attache (DAO) advises that the GOP presently participates in 11 UN-led PKOs, with more than 9630 troops, military observers and police currently blue-hatted (approximately 7.6% of the 73,034 total UN mission personnel).  As of February 28, Pakistani forces were serving in UN PKOs in:  -- Western Sahara (MINURSO) - 7 observers -- Haiti (MINUSTAH) - 250 police -- D.R. of the Congo (MONUC) - 3563 troops, 43 observers -- Burundi (ONUB) -- 1193 troops, 5 observers -- Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) -- 374 troops, 11 observers -- Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) -- 1 police, 1 observer -- Timor-Leste (UNOTIL -- 4 police, 2 observers -- Kovoso (UNMIK) -- 158 police, 1 observer -- Liberia (UNMIL) -- 2731 troops, 5 police, 16 observers -- Sudan (UNMIS) -- 1202 troops, 23 police, 21 observers -- India/Pakistan (UNMOGIP) -- 10 observers  3.  (C)  Without knowing how many troops the UN DPKO is contemplating for the Darfur mission, post can offer only a rough estimate of the GOP's potential contribution.  ODRP suggests requesting a brigade level of commitment (roughly 2200 troops) as an ambitious starting point for a discussion of a Pakistani contribution.  A realistic expectation would be for a battalion sized element (roughly 650 troops). Pakistan should not be asked to support any helicopter lift requirements, as all assets are required for current GWOT efforts.  4.  (C)  Comment:  Post wishes to add that, in addition to its extensive PKO commitments, Pak mil currently has approximately 35,000 Regular Army troops engaged in security operations against anti-Coalition militants and extremist elements in both North and South Waziristan along the Pak-Afghan border.  (Note:  In addtion to the regular Army forces, another 43,000 Frontier Corps troops are delployed along the border.  End note.)  Applying a general ratio of 3:1 required to sustain operations over the long-haul, the Pak mil commitment to FATA operations requires more than 100,000 troops.  Any PKO contribution that would compromise this commitment should be avoided, thereby raising the prospect that contributions to a Darfur PKO would either come at the expense of Pakistan's current UN PKO commitments or require the GOP to draw from forces deployed on its eastern border with India. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE55461", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/7/2006 10:45", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005945  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KUNR, PREL, PHUM, UNGA, PK SUBJECT: MESSAGE DELIVERED THAT U.S. IS NOT RUNNING FOR UN HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL  REF: STATE 55461  Polcouns delivered reftel message April 7 in a meeting with Shafqat Ali Khan, Director for Human Rights in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' United Nations and Policy Planning Directorate.  Khan expressed regret that the United States would not be running for a seat on the UN Human Rights Council this year, explaining that U.S. participation would strengthen the Council and that as a small nation Pakistan generally favored strong international institutions.  Khan was pleased that the United States intended to run for a seat next year.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/7/2006 12:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005978  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2016 TAGS: ECON, PREL, PK SUBJECT: A/S BOUCHER DISCUSSES U.S.-PAKISTAN STRATEGIC DIALOGUE WITH PAKISTAN MFA  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d.  1.  (C) Summary:  Assistant Secretary Boucher reviewed the status of Strategic Dialogue initiatives and options for structuring the Dialogue in April 4-5 meetings with Foreign Minister Kasuri, Foreign Secretary Khan and Additional Secretary for the Americas Shahid Kamal.   All sides agreed  SIPDIS that the Dialogue marked a major step forward in the bilateral relationship.  The Pakistani side welcomed A/S Boucher's report on work that is already underway, and noted that they have appointed co-chairs for some of the Dialogue topics.  MFA reps did not have strongly held views about how the Dialogue might be structured, but were receptive to proposals offered by A/S Boucher.  End Summary.  2.  (C) In all of A/S Boucher's meetings at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, counterparts praised the Strategic Dialogue as a major advance in the U.S.-Pakistan relationship. Foreign Minister Kasuri commented that the inauguration of a Strategic Partnership during President Bush's visit had broadened the bilateral relationship. He welcomed the fact that this would be institutionalized in the Dialogue. Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan alluded to perceived ups and downs in the relationship over the years and said that, in the public eye, the Dialogue would be seen as a welcome sign of a new and more stable friendship.  Initiatives: ------------  3.  (C) A/S Boucher used his Islamabad meetings to review progress already underway under the Dialogue, including energy discussions launched during Energy Secretary Bodman's visit, expansion of the Fulbright program, inauguration of a University Exchange program with Southern Methodist University, and Science and Technology initiatives.  Riaz Khan emphasized the need for \"real projects\" that would symbolize the deepening bilateral relationship.  4.  (C) Khan said the Bilateral Investment Treaty was with the Prime Minister's Office and there were still several outstanding issues, including liability and jurisdiction.  An internal meeting had been scheduled later in April to review the issues again, he said.  Khan agreed with A/S Boucher that these matters could be addressed in a side letter, rather than the text of the treaty.  5.  (C) A/S Boucher reported that the U.S. is commissioning a study on the Reconstruction Opportunity Zones initiative, in part to lay the groundwork for Congressional approval. Legislation could not be submitted before the fall, he said; in the meantime, the U.S. was looking at product areas, with a view to diversification of exports -- though apparel would be factored in.  He encouraged Pakistan to use the planned April 19 Joint Economic Committee meeting with Afghanistan to discuss ROZ ideas.  6.  (C) Shahid Kamal said that the Pakistani business community is enthusiastic about the proposed Center for Entrepreneurship and noted that the Beyster Institute of UC San Diego had relevant expertise.  Structure ---------  7.  (C) It was clear that the MFA did not have strongly held views about how the Strategic Dialogue should be structured. Riaz Khan was open to the idea of attaching sub-groups to the Dialogue, suggesting that the India-Pakistan Composite Dialogue offered a model, with occasional high-level plenary sessions overseeing reasonably autonomous subgroups.  A/S Boucher agreed that the sub-groups should operate autonomously.  Khan added that Pakistan was very interested in the various economic, educational and scientific areas, but that the Dialogue should also include a forum for discussing political issues, such as Iran, India and nuclear issues.  A/S Boucher agreed, noting that those were good subjects to review in strategic-level discussions, and that in addition Afghanistan and relations with Central Asia should also be included.  ISLAMABAD 00005978  002 OF 002    8. (C) Shahid Kamal reported that Pakistan had agreed to the proposed April 26-27 dates for the inaugural Washington meeting of the Strategic Dialogue.  He informally suggested that subjects might be divided into three baskets, to address bilateral, regional and global issues.  He envisioned that the initial April 26-27 meeting might consist of relatively small delegations and serve as a \"curtain raiser\" for follow-on subgroup meetings in subsequent weeks.  Pakistan had already identified Dr. Ataur Rahman (Chair of the Higher Education Commission) and Finance Secretary Tanvir Ali Agha as likely Pakistani co-chairs of subgroups.  A/S Boucher proposed that the April 26-27 session begin with a smaller dinner for senior participants on the 26th. This could be followed by an expanded meeting on the 27th that would include subgroup heads, with a full plenary session to follow -- in which participants would be given their marching orders.  Sub-groups would then meet separately and reconvene at the end of the day for a concluding session. Meanwhile, the principals on each side could cover political and strategic topics separately.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE54084", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/10/2006 1:55", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005983  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: OVIP, OTRA, BE, PK, AMGT, ASEC SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR GOVERNORS DELEGATION  REF: STATE 54084  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Gov. Mitch Daniels, Gov. Jeb Bush, Gov. Joe Manchin, Gov. Tom Vilsack, Lt. General Blum, Maj. Reale, Ltc. Schroeder, Dan Wilmot, and Anthony Welcher for April 16 and 17.  The purpose of the visit is to transit Pakistan.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Mohammed Motiwala. He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Cell: 0300-501-2202.  3.  The control officer will meet visitors upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad. Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  4.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  5. Unless only transiting Pakistan, everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  6.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  7.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  8.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  9.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  10.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  11. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services: NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/11/2006 12:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 006116  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, EAID, PK SUBJECT: A/S BOUCHER MEETS SENATE CHAIRMAN AND NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SPEAKER  ISLAMABAD 00006116  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.  1. (C) Summary:  In separate meetings with visiting Assistant Secretary Richard Boucher, Senate Chairman Mohammedmian  SIPDIS Soomro and National Assembly Speaker Chaudhry Amir Hussain confirmed their support for the USAID legislative strengthening project.  Both leaders promised to secure a site for the proposed Institute for Legislative Studies and to support televising proceedings of their Chambers.  They cautioned, however, that other officials were involved and could delay both projects.  When Boucher questioned them on democratic elections, both parliamentary leaders promised free and fair elections in 2007, but were divided as to the prevalence of past election irregularities, with the Speaker giving all previous elections a clean bill of health.  Both leaders expressed strong support for an independent, activist Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP), noting that this was already promised in legislation.  Soomro noted that democratization would also require democracy within political parties and urged A/S Boucher to focus on this important area.  The leaders were open to the concept of a broad coalition of moderate forces in advance of the 2007 elections.  End Summary.  Legislative Strengthening Program  2. (C) A/S Boucher opened his meetings with Chairman Soomro and Speaker Hussain by noting the important role that strong legislative institutions must play in a democratic set-up and promised continued support to strengthen parliamentary institutions.  Both leaders responded with thanks for the work that USAID was already doing in this regard.  The Speaker praised the USAID decision to work directly with parliamentary institutions in the current program rather than through NGOs as in the past.  3. (C) A/S Boucher raised our interest in continuing such support through construction of a Pakistan Institute for Legislative Studies (PILS), but cautioned that USG support was contingent on the parliamentary leadership's identification of an appropriate parcel of land and agreement to continue budgetary support.  Both leaders promised ongoing support to the PILS and agreed to work to obtain the necessary parcel of land.  Nothing currently in their possession, however, was considered adequate.  Soomro explained that the process was delayed by the resignation of the Minister of State for Interior who had been handling the issue. While the leadership wanted to obtain land quickly, several government agencies were involved, including the obstructionist Capital Development Authority (CDA).  The Speaker promised to raise the issue with the Prime Minister and have him press for a swift allocation within one or two months.  In the interim, both leaders requested that training for parliamentarians continue using either the Parliamentary Lodges or the old National Assembly building.  4. (C) A/S Boucher raised the important role that televising legislative proceedings could play in raising public awareness of legislatures' performance.  Soomro immediately agreed pronouncing himself \"very keen\" on the idea. Televised proceedings would provide the public direct access to legislative information, increase accountability, and help voters judge legislator's performance.  Hussain also expressed strong support for televised proceedings and promised that the process was moving forward.  Both cautioned, however, that numerous government agencies were involved in the decision to proceed, making it a complex and lengthy debate.  Soomro cited the Minister of Information as particularly problematic.  Elections  5. (C) A/S Boucher reiterated to both leaders the USG position that free and fair elections must be held in 2007. He pointed out that previous elections did not adequately meet these criteria and that a strong, independent ECP was  ISLAMABAD 00006116  002.2 OF 002   vital to the process.  While both leaders promised that the 2007 contest would be free and fair, the Speaker denied that any fraud had occurred in previous elections.  He argued that those who lost alleged rigging to cover their own deficiencies and that the allegations were baseless.  The ECP was already fully empowered and ensured that no improper activity took place.  6. (C) Soomro had a more realistic view, admitting that violations had occurred in the past and that the ECP would need to be vigilant to prevent them in 2007.  He believed that the ECP powers were sufficiently extensive but argued that a more conducive environment was needed.  In this regard, he argued that it was necessary to change Pakistan's political culture.  Victory in elections was, at present, directly linked to a party's ability to obtain resources and disburse patronage.  As no transparent hiring process existed, civil servants who administered elections were often indebted to a party for their job and would tilt contests in their favor.  Until patronage and money were delinked from election victory, parties would continue to do all they could to violate the rules.  7. (C) Soomro further argued that a lack of internal democracy within political parties contributed to systemic weaknesses.  Parties tended to select candidates and leaders through appointment rather than democratic elections, leading to ongoing internal divisions and personal animosities. Soomro argued that all parties should be required to introduce genuine democracy and suggested that perhaps oversight of internal party contests by the ECP may be necessary.  8. (C) A/S Boucher asked the parliamentary leaders about the possibility of new political party coalitions developing in advance of the 2007 elections.  Both leaders were of the view that shifting alliances were a regular part of Pakistani politics.  Hussain stated that the governing party was prepared to work with any like-minded group, but that cooperation would depend on the conduct of the opposition parties.  In the current, polarized environment, he did not believe that differences could be easily overcome.  Anti-Money Laundering Law  9. (C) A/S Boucher pressed Speaker Hussain to seek the release of the GOP's Anti-Money Laundering Law from the Finance Committee.  The Speaker made no comment and rapidly switched the subject to thank the USG for its assistance in earthquake relief.  10. (U) Assistant Secretary Boucher has cleared this message. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/11/2006 12:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 006117  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: A/S BOUCHER MEETING WITH CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER   ISLAMABAD 00006117  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.  1. (C) Summary:  In his first meeting with A/S Boucher, Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) Qazi Mohammad Farooq stressed his commitment to holding a free and fair election in 2007. A/S Bouhcer pledged our continued support and stressed the importance of the commission's independence as vital to successful elections.  Farooq expressed strong appreciation for US Government assistance in this regard, welcoming USAID's focus on voter roles, training, and ballot boxes. Farooq promised that he would engage with political parties to rebuild the Election Commission of Pakistan's (ECP) credibility and resolve electoral issues.  Farooq noted that the greatest challenge to free and fair elections was a lack of political will, noting that if this existed the ECP had extensive powers.  Farooq stressed that international observation of the electoral process was absolutely essential and that the ECP would unilaterally invite observers.  End Summary.  A Free, Fair, and Transparent Election  2. (C) A/S Boucher stressed to newly-appointed CEC Farooq that the US Government would support free and fair elections in 2007.  The independence of the ECP was absolutely vital. Farooq agreed that the ECP was critical to the free and fair election that he was committed to organizing in 2007.  Farooq noted that a lack of political will on the part of his predecessors was the principal obstacle to a free and fair contest.  While numerous players would try to interfere in 2007, the ECP would evolve mechanisms to make such interference far more difficult and costly.  With a clear legal framework now in place, the ECP can keep most violations at bay by utilizing its existing powers and authorities.  Farooq noted that the ECP was largely independent with control over its finances, staffing structure, and hiring processes.  Farooq promised that he would avoid the mistakes of his predecessors, including last minute changes to laws, polling operations, and polling places that had essentially served as a form of rigging.  Voter Roles  3.  (C) When A/S Boucher inquired about the difficulties ahead, Farooq stressed that his initial challenge would be the creation of accurate electoral roles.  These were \"the essence of free and fair elections.\"  At least half of all complaints emanated directly from the improperly prepared voter roles currently in use.  Computerization would increase public access to these vital documents and ensure that future updates can be more easily carried out.  Asked about the process to be used in preparing the new lists, Farooq stated that he would scrupulously adhere to the procedures laid out in the law, including door-to-door verification and a period for public review and challenges.  Farooq noted that while the ECP would certainly use data in the National Identification Card and census databases as a cross-check, an independent survey conducted by ECP staff was the only way to ensure accuracy and impartiality.  Engagement with Political Parties  4. (C) A/S Boucher underscored the importance of regular engagement between the CEC and the heads of political parties.  This would enable the ECP to address their numerous complaints about past elections and enable agreement on steps that can prevent violations in future.  The CEC agreed that consultation was essential.  He promised to deal with all parties on an equal basis and to address their outstanding concerns.  He concurred that mutual agreement on processes was important to build the credibility of the ECP and welcomed USG assistance in creating an on-going forum. Farooq cautioned, however, that at present the parties were engaged in significant discussions with each other and would not be prepared to engage him or the ECP for at least a few  ISLAMABAD 00006117  002.2 OF 002   more weeks.  International Observation  5. (C) A/S Boucher queried Justice Farooq on his views about international observation.  Farooq responded that he considered it an integral part of any free and fair election process.  He said that sampling efforts would need to be expanded in the 2007 elections.  Observation in all districts of the country would be essential.  The ECP would unilaterally invite international observation of the process.  Farooq was unconcerned about any political fallout, noting that Pakistan had a long history of observation and that the decision rested solely with the ECP.  Administrative Challenges  6. (C) Farooq highlighted for A/S Boucher a number of other administrative challenges for the 2007 polls.  The CEC praised USG assistance on transparent ballot boxes, noting that this will help to minimize allegations of rigging. Similarly, the CEC reiterated the need for training of both ECP polling staff and voters.  He pointed out that strengthening the ECP's own academy was a useful starting point.  While UNDP has promised some assistance, additional support was needed.  (Note: UNDP Islamabad does not/not yet have approved funding for this project.  End Note.)  Asked by A/S Boucher about electoral conditions in the FATA and earthquake zones, Farooq was relatively confident that any challenges could be successfully addressed over the next year.  He was more concerned about parts of Balochistan, where deteriorating security conditions might force the ECP to delay polls.  7. (U) Assistant Secretary Boucher has cleared this message. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/12/2006 7:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 006136  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/11/2016 TAGS: MNUC, PARM, PREL, KNNP, PK, IN SUBJECT: PAKISTAN REITERATES CALL FOR STRATEGIC RESTRAINT REGIME IN SOUTH ASIA   Classified By: Derived from DCSG 05-01, d.  1.  (U) In an April 5 address at Columbia University, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz reiterated Pakistan's call for a \"package deal\" on civil nuclear cooperation involving both India and Pakistan and noted that Pakistan had sought a \"strategic restraint regime\" to prevent an arms race and stabilize the strategic postures of the two countries.  When asked on April 8 about Secretary Rice's mention of non-proliferation in her Senate testimony, Foreign Office Spokesperson Tasneem Aslam noted \"Pakistan has already made a proposal on a strategic restraint regime in South Asia. These things can be discussed in the context of our proposals.\"  2.  (C) On April 10, MFA Director for Disarmament Khalid Mehmood briefed PolCouns on Pakistan's proposal for a strategic restraint regime (SRR).  The proposal had its origins in Pakistani ideas that had been floated with the Indians in the 1990s, before the Indo-Pak dialogue stalled (in 1998).  (Prior to the two countries' nuclear tests, he said, Pakistan had called for a nuclear free zone in South Asia, combined with a \"no-war pact.\")  In 2004, Pakistan tabled a modified SRR proposal that included the following elements: (a) no operational deployment of nuclear-capable missiles, (b) keeping nuclear weapons on low alert status (i.e., warheads to be kept separate from delivery vehicles), (c) avoiding an arms race, and (d) no acquisition or deployment of destabilizing systems like anti-ballistic missile systems.  3.  (C) According to Mehmood, the Indian side had rejected the proposal, saying that its security concerns transcended South Asia. Pakistan's view, he said, was that extra-regional considerations should not exclude the prospect of strategic restraint within the region, especially given that the preponderance of India's conventional forces appeared to be arrayed towards Pakistan. Pakistan remained concerned about the threat of an accidental or unauthorized nuclear incident, he added.  4.  (C) Mehmood noted that although the SRR is not moving forward, Pakistan and India now have a pre-notification agreement on ballistic missile tests.  Pakistan hoped to extend the agreement to cruise missile tests, he said, explaining that cruise missiles could also carry nuclear payloads, but India had not responded favorably as yet. These discussions were ongoing in two experts groups under the Composite Dialogue, one dealing with conventional CBMs and the other with nuclear CBMs.  The groups had met three times, most recently in August 2005, and were next scheduled to meet April 25-27, with the first two days devoted to nuclear CBMs and the last day to conventional.  5.  (C) Asked why Aslam and Aziz were raising the SRR concept in the context of the debate over the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative, Mehmood speculated that Pakistan hoped to underscore that it was a responsible nuclear power, and thus a candidate for a similar civil-nuclear deal.  6.  (C) Comment:  We suspect that much of the noise Pakistani officials are making regarding the U.S.-India civ-nuc deal is playing to a domestic audience.  Raising the SRR at this time is probably not due to any calculation that Pakistan has a realistic prospect of participating in a \"package\" civ-nuc deal with India.  It is more likely that with the eyes of the world (and Congress) on India, Pakistan senses that it has more leverage to prod India for a response to their SRR proposal.  Pakistan may also have an eye on the April 25-26 Pak-India session on Nuclear CBMs.     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/12/2006 14:11", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 006198  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: KARACHI POST CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR AMBASSADOR CROCKER AND ERIC ALM  1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Ambassador Crocker and ARSO Eric Alm who will be visiting post for meetings. Their itinerary is follows:  April 14-Dep Islamabad on Air Blue 203 at 0930; arrive at 1135. April 15-Dep Karachi on Air Blue 204 at 1600; arrive at 1805.  2.  Please provide transportation from/to the airport.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD3254", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/13/2006 13:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 006242  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2016 TAGS: IN, PK, PREL, ETRD SUBJECT: INDIA-PAKISTAN COMPOSITE DIALOGUE MOVES FORWARD  REF: ISLAMABAD 3254  ISLAMABAD 00006242  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.  1.  (C)  Summary:  Although there have been no major breakthroughs since the opening meetings of the third round of Composite Dialogue talks in January, delegations from India and Pakistan have been busy working on a variety of issues.  The frequency of these high-level meetings suggests that Pakistan remains committed to moving forward despite frequent official complaints that India is not permitting reciprocal progress on the \"core\" issue of Kashmir.  Media reports of expert-level consultations and incremental progress on a variety of practical issues have become a regular feature of Pakistani newspapers over the past month. End summary.  2.  (U) Since the third round of the India-Pakistan Composite Dialogue Process in New Delhi in January (reftel), Indian and Pakistani delegations have engaged in several technical-level and Joint Working Group meetings:  -- Technical-level meeting with civil aviation authorities (March 6-7, New Delhi)  -- Joint Commission Working Groups on the Environment and Science and Technology (March 21-22, Islamabad)  -- Technical-level meeting between the Central Bureau of Investigation (India) and the Federal Investigation Agency (Pakistan) (March 21-22, New Delhi)  -- Joint Working Group on Economic and Commercial Cooperation (March 28-29, Islamabad)  3.  (U) The Central Bureau of Investigation of India (CBI) and Pakistan's Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), met March 21-22 in New Delhi, their first meeting in seventeen years. Both agreed to explore opportunities in professional training and cooperation in combating human trafficking, counterfeit currency and illegal immigration.  The director of CBI accepted FIA's invitation to visit Islamabad later this year to continue discussions.  4.  (U) In Islamabad on March 28-29, the Joint Working Group on Economic and Commercial Cooperation agreed to move forward on bilateral transportation, trade, communication and investment.  Both sides indicated they are ready to sign a shipping agreement, with a target date in July.  The Indian and Pakistani commerce secretaries also agreed to jointly register basmati rice, which could facilitate issuance of a geographic patent restricting the \"basmati\" designation to rice grown in India and Pakistan.  The delegations also agreed to expedite the process of opening state bank branches in each country -- a commitment long stalled -- and to ease visa requirements for businessmen and tourists.  To meet Pakistan's tea shortage, both parties encouraged exchange visits of tea import/export delegations to discuss opening the Pakistani market to Indian tea sellers.  In the joint statement, both sides listed steps to reach agreement in future meetings, including:  -- An Indian promise to provide detailed proposals on IT-enabled medical services and export insurance cooperation;  -- A meeting of transportation experts at the Attari-Wagah border to discuss upgrading infrastructure and to facilitate the export of transit cargo to Afghanistan;  -- Indian assurances to complete the installation of a fiber optic line on the Indian side of the border to link with the line that has been installed on the Pakistani side;  (Note: This would be particularly helpful after the large economic losses caused by the break in Pakistan's sole high-speed data line last fall.  End note.)   ISLAMABAD 00006242  002.2 OF 002   -- An Indian request that Pakistan allow the import of 286 more Indian products into Pakistan, which Pakistan agreed to consider;  -- A Pakistani announcement that it had ratified the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), making tariff benefits available to all member countries, including India.  5.  (U) Six more meetings are scheduled to complete the third round of the Composite Dialogue talks:  -- April 18-19, Islamabad - Tulbul Navigation Project/Wullar Barrage  -- May 23-24, New Delhi - Siachen  -- May 25-26, New Delhi - Sir Creek  -- May 30-13, Islamabad - Terrorism and Drug Trafficking  -- June 1-2, New Delhi - Promotion of Friendly Exchanges  -- July 20-21, New Delhi - Foreign Secretary and Foreign Minister-level Review Meeting  -- July 22, New Delhi - Plenary Session of the Joint Commission  6.  (C) Comment.  The frequency of the meetings highlights Pakistan's commitment to the Composite Dialogue process. Thorough Pakistani press coverage of the Dialogue also signals that the media (and their readers) are interested in the outcomes of these meetings -- there was extensive coverage of the Joint Working Group on Economic and Commercial Cooperation.  Pakistani officials continue to complain that India is not permitting reciprocal progress on the \"core\" issue of Kashmir, but for now this has not prompted Pakistan to stall progress in other areas of the Dialogue.  GOP MFA officials have also emphasized the need to lock in progress in the Composite Dialogue to shield these positive developments from any downturn in relations.  End comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/14/2006 14:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 006419  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2016 TAGS: MNUC, PREL, MARR, PK, AF, IN, PGOV, IR SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER AZIZ BRIEFS SENATOR HAGEL ON PAKISTAN FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC ISSUES.  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  In a wide-ranging conversation with visiting Senator Hagel (R-NE), Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz reiterated Pakistan's opposition to any nuclear weapons program in Iran, but supported Iran's right to a civil nuclear energy program.  He praised Afghan President Karzai, and highlighted Pakistan's security efforts in its restive tribal areas. On peace discussions with India, he said Pakistan hoped for accelerated progress on Kashmir.  Pakistan was concerned that the civ-nuc deal with India would give India the capability to produce 100-400 additional warheads per year.  The deal would have been improved, Aziz said, had it been combined with a Pakistan-India nuclear restraint regime.  Aziz reported that Pakistan had prepared a Letter of Request (LOR) for 18 C and D block F-16s and 30 A and B block.  Later, Pakistan might ask for an additional 18 C and D block F-16s.  He defended the government's performance in promoting the economy and moving the country toward democracy.  He stressed that Pakistan was making strides toward democracy and said that on this score many in the Cabinet deeply resented the \"condescending statements\" of visiting dignitaries.  End Summary.  2.  (C) In an April 12 meeting with visiting Senator Chuck Hagel, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz offered a tour de horizon of Pakistan's foreign and domestic policy concerns.  Aziz explained that his comments were \"hot off the press,\" reflecting discussions held that day in (a) an unusually substantive cabinet meeting dealing with national and security issues, and (b) a meeting of Pakistan's National Command Authority (chaired by President Musharraf and including Aziz, the Ministers of Defense and Foreign Affairs, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the military Section chiefs).  The latter meeting, he said, had also included scientists and had focused on nuclear issues. Senator Hagel reported on his discussions in India over previous days.  He offered his sympathies in the wake of the deadly bombing at a Karachi religious festival, underscoring that he was a strong supporter of Pakistan and that Pakistan had a lot of friends in Congress.  Iran ----  3.  (C) Aziz said that Pakistani scientists at the NCA meeting, viewed Iran's announcement on uranium enrichment was \"nothing  new.\"  In their judgment, Iran was \"re-declaring\" a capability it already had.  Pakistan had been clear that Iran must not produce nuclear weapons under any circumstances, Aziz continued, but Iran was entitled to a civil nuclear program under IAEA safeguards.  The international community should use diplomacy much more rigorously; \"anything short of military action.\"  Aziz also sought to distinguish Pakistan's program from Iran's, saying that Pakistan had pursued its program only in response to India's, and had done so in order to preserve balance and regional stability.  Afghanistan -----------  4.  (C) Pakistan is interested in a \"strong, stable, vibrant Afghanistan,\" Aziz asserted.  Violence and instability in Afghanistan would be destabilizing to the entire region.  For that reason, Pakistan had taken very significant steps in the border region, Aziz noted, adding that he had asked Secretary Rumsfeld for additional USG help.  Pakistan had sent the army into the tribal areas for the first time in history in order to deny the Taliban a sanctuary -- a move that had led to resistance from the local population.  Pakistan did not need to be \"preached at\" on this score; it was pursuing terrorists out of conviction.  However, it took \"two to tango\" and Afghanistan needed to do more on its side of the border. Pakistan had \"clear evidence\" that anti-Pakistan elements were filtering in from across the border and from Afghan refugee camps.  5.  (C) Despite the \"snafu\" over the \"obsolete\" intelligence information passed to Pakistan by President Karzai, Aziz said he was convinced that Karzai was well meaning.  Pakistan would support him \"two hundred percent.\"  Aziz noted that Pakistani representatives at the recent trilateral U.S.-Afghan-Pakistan intelligence meeting in Bagram had  ISLAMABAD 00006419  002 OF 003   returned pleased, though there was a lingering \"trust deficit\" between the sides.  India -----  6.  (C) Pakistan was continuing to press forward on peace efforts with India, Aziz said, adding that there might be a window of opportunity on a couple issues.  However, there was a need for progress on the core issues relating to Jammu and Kashmir, especially steps toward demilitarizing the area. India acknowledged that the level of infiltration had declined; international relief workers had been given free reign in Azad Kashmir and no \"camps\" were visible.  (Note: presumably a reference to militant camps.)  The Indian side needed to match President Musharraf's \"passion\" for progress on the issue.  This was a defining moment, and Pakistan was open-minded on possible solutions.  Civil-Nuclear Initiative ------------------------  7. (C) Aziz focused on two points relating to the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative.  First, it would have been better if any deal affecting nuclear capabilities had been combined with a nuclear restraint regime that covered both countries. The restraint regime had been the subject of a long conversation in the NCA meeting, Aziz added.  Second, the deal as currently structured would allow India to produce more fissile material, which would lead to more warheads, creating a strategic imbalance.   Aziz reported that Pakistani experts estimated that this new ability to substitute imported fuel for use in safeguarded civil reactors would free up fuel for the production of 100-400 extra warheads per year.  He said Pakistan understood Washington's desire to engage India on the issue, but if it affected Pakistan's security, Pakistan would have to respond.  Pakistan would \"have to do whatever it has to do\" to maintain regional stability.  8.  (C) Aziz noted that Pakistan also had very significant civil nuclear energy needs, and projected that it would require 8800 MGW of nuclear power by 2030.  Pakistan understood that it was in the \"doldrums\" due to AQ Khan's misdeeds, but its needs were real and it would have to identify alternative sources.  Pakistan had been burned by Khan, Aziz added.  Khan had not even been a scientist, but rather an engineer and entrepreneur -- and now he was \"in the doghouse.\"  9.  (C) Senator Hagel responded that Congress was looking closely at the civil nuclear initiative with India, with particular attention to \"the IAEA piece.\" Congress would want to understand the India-specific safeguards protocol with the IAEA.  In his view, taken as a whole, the agreement was in the interests of both Pakistan and India.  It should not be seen as directed against other countries in the region, whether India or China.  Hagel said he expected the agreement would ultimately be ratified, but there were uncertainties.  Law and Order and Security --------------------------  10.  (C) Pakistan is strongly opposed to terrorism, Aziz said.  \"There is no good terrorist.\"  Alluding to the April 12 bombing in Karachi, he explained that law and order was a provincial responsibility and he planned to travel to Karachi the next day to look into the situation.  However, the investigation into the bombing was proceeding well.  11.  (C) Aziz reported that Pakistan had prepared the Letter of Request (LOR) for U.S. aircraft and \"targeting equipment.\"  This would include a request for 18 F--16 C and D block aircraft, with the prospect of purchasing another 18 later. In addition, Pakistan would request 30 F--16 A and B block aircraft.  At the same time, Pakistan was awaiting a contract for a purchase of Chinese aircraft.  Pakistan's overall doctrine was \"minimum credible deterrence,\" Aziz explained. In fact it had considerably paired down its request due to the earthquake.  Economy -------  ISLAMABAD 00006419  003 OF 003    12.  (C) Aziz defended the government's handling of the economy over recent years, saying the middle class was expanding as Pakistan retained high growth rates (the second highest in the world last year).  Inflation was under control, reserves had increased, foreign direct investment had hit a new high of $3 billion last year, and there were a lot of important projects still in the pipeline. Unemployment had declined, but further progress would require steps to improve skill levels among workers.  Aziz added that Pakistan's economic agenda was focused on deregulation, market economics and privatization of state assets.  Pakistan had recently sold a state-owned steel mill and half of its banks were owned by foreigners.  Democracy ---------  13.  (C) \"We are neither apologetic nor defensive\" about the progress of democracy in Pakistan, Aziz asserted.  Pakistan had a very active political scene, with vociferous opposition parties.  The governing coalition had only 200 of the 342 seats in the parliament.  Leaders of some of the opposition parties were now out of the country only because they were \"up to their necks\" in activities that would land them in jail in any civilized country.   The press was more of a force than at any time in Pakistan's history, and there had been a proliferation of electronic media outlets.  For much of Pakistan's history offending journalists would be locked up.  In contrast, President Musharraf took pride in the independent media.  Pakistan also had a \"new, tough, Independent Election Commissioner.\"  In selecting the Commissioner, the government had asked the opposition parties to give their views.  Some had; some hadn't.  14.  (C) Pakistan needed no lessons on democracy, Aziz concluded.  It believed in freedom of expression and the power of the ballot box, but that did not mean it would permit corruption to flourish again.  On this score, even opposition figures privately credited Musharraf, who was widely seen as clean.   Aziz admitted that Pakistan had \"some issues,\" including a President that also held another office.  That arrangement had been dictated by circumstances and it would expire.  For the first time, an elected parliament would serve its full term -- until November 2007 -- Aziz observed.  He noted that during the cabinet meeting, his colleagues had expressed resentment at \"condescending statements\" made by friends and visitors about democracy in Pakistan.  15.  (U) Senator Hagel has cleared this message. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/14/2006 15:07", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 006420  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2016 TAGS: MNUC, PTER, PGOV, PREL, PK, AF, IN SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF EXPRESSES CONCERN TO SENATOR HAGEL ON HIS RELATIONSHIP WITH THE U.S.  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S) Summary:  President Musharraf reviewed with visiting Senator Hagel his concerns over his relationship with the U.S., citing the U.S.-India Civil-Nuclear Initiative and perceived pressure for democratization.  He also described the threat of Talibanization in Pakistan's Tribal Areas.  He worried that the Civil Nuclear Initiative implicitly recognized India as a nuclear state and could reignite an arms race in South Asia.  He urged that the U.S. support construction of a new fully safeguarded nuclear power plant for Pakistan, arguing that it would not give Pakistan any technology or fuel it did already have and that he would much rather get assistance from the U.S. than from other countries; this would help correct perceptions that a rift had developed between the two countries.  Similarly, Musharraf expressed concern about a growing perception that there was a rift between him and the United States on democratization.  He was moving the country steadily toward democracy, he said, but there was a perception that he was doing this only because he had been put in a corner. Musharraf reported that while the Al Qa'ida presence in the Tribal Areas was declining, \"Talibanization\" was increasing and spreading into neighboring districts of Pakistan. He reviewed a four-part strategy of military, political, administrative and development measures to counter the trend.  Musharraf stressed that success would depend on complementary efforts on the Afghan side of the border and complained that India was sowing distrust by spreading misinformation in Afghanistan.  End Summary.  2.  (C) President Musharraf met with visiting Senator Chuck Hagel on April 13, using the opportunity to convey his views on the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear initiative, democracy and Pakistani steps to address the threat of \"Talibanization\" in the Tribal Areas.  Senator Hagel opened the meeting by stressing the importance of the U.S. relationship with Pakistan and the need to work together in confronting mutual challenges.   The United States appreciated Pakistan's efforts in the border area, he said, and understood that the success of mutual efforts in the region rested on the strength of the bilateral relationship.  Nuclear Power -------------  3.  (S) Musharraf reported that he had chaired a meeting of Pakistan's National Command Authority (NCA) the previous day and that perceptions of the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear initiative were not good.  These negative perceptions reflected widely held views in the society as a whole.  \"We understand your geostrategic relationship with India,\" he said, but in Pakistan the deal was \"vastly unpopular\" for two reasons.  First, it implicitly accepted India as a nuclear state while excluding Pakistan, so Pakistanis felt \"singled out.\"  Secondly, it would increase India's ability to proliferate because India's weaponization efforts had been constrained by a shortage of nuclear fuel, which would no longer exist under the Initiative.  This was the unanimous perception of the members of the NCA.  Pakistan would now be grappling with the prospect of a nuclear arms race with India because it would never allow its nuclear deterrent capability to be compromised.  4.  (S) Musharraf added that he also did not understand why the United States could not let Pakistan have a 1000 MGW civil nuclear reactor.  Pakistan did not need more fuel for the reactor, so it would not lead to proliferation. Moreover, it would not involve any technology that Pakistan did not already possess.  Pakistan's nuclear capabilities were already far more advanced than India's.  Pakistan would welcome any kind of safeguards regime over the plant, Musharraf continued.  Finally, Pakistan had very real energy needs that would have to be addressed one way or another. Currently, China was providing a reactor, and Pakistan would need more.  That was the reality and Pakistan would have to move forward, whether with the United States or not.  5.   (S) Musharraf stressed that he would far rather move forward with the United States, but the Administration's current posture precluded that.  He cherished his friendship with President Bush and he had said so both publicly and  ISLAMABAD 00006420  002 OF 003   privately: \"I say he is a friend. He is sincere and open. These are things you appreciate.  And we are together in fighting terror.\"  Unfortunately, the media created the impression that a rift had developed in the wake of the President's visit to Pakistan.  This perception was a greater concern than actual nuclear capabilities.  \"We know our capabilities and our potential,\" Musharraf stressed, Pakistan would get the reactor anyway.  So the only result of the current policy would be to deepen the perception that there were problems between the two countries.  Despite Pakistan's willingness to submit to safeguards, everything would be given to India and Pakistan was being singled out.  6.  (C) In response, Senator Hagel indicated that while he supported strengthening the U.S.-India relationship, he also agreed that the United States had not given enough attention to Pakistan.  The U.S.-India relationship needed to be seen in the context of wider U.S. relationships in the region.  It should not have the effect of intimidating or isolating Pakistan or China or other countries in the region. Bilateral initiatives should be framed in a regional context.  Hagel said he expected Congress would ultimately pass the U.S.-India agreement, but many uncertainties remained.  Hagel added that Congress would probably want to assess the IAEA protocol with India before passing the agreement.  Democracy ---------  7.  (C) Musharraf worried that this perception of a rift between the United States and him was reinforced \"when people come and overdo the issue of democracy.\"  He acknowledged that his being in uniform was undemocratic, but added, \"we have never had democracy in Pakistan.\"  In contrast, he had \"empowered people, women, minorities and the grass roots.\" He had freed the media and enabled the parliament to complete its full tenure and hold a second election for the first time in Pakistan's history.  He was totally in favor of democracy, and a great deal had been achieved, so people should be careful about statements in the press.  8.  (C) Musharraf cited an editorial that morning asserting that recent USG comments on democracy were evidence that the US was moving away from him.  \"Yes, I agree,\" he said, \"we should have democracy\" but he also deserved credit for what he had achieved in that direction.  Pakistan would have \"free and fair elections,\" but there was a perception that he was being forced into it.  As in the case of broader U.S. relations with the region, the idea was taking hold that Pakistan was being singled out for pressure.  India was being treated differently -- \"as a partner.\"  Ever since the President's visit, there was a growing perception that his own personal standing had declined.  Talibanization --------------  9.  (S) Musharraf observed that in his view there had been a significant change in the Tribal Areas.  Pakistani forces continued to go after Al Qa'ida elements \"whenever we get word.\"  \"We strike fast,\" he said, adding that there had been a very successful strike the previous night.  However, in his assessment, Al Qa'ida was greatly weakened and the Taliban was stepping into the vacuum.  Now Talibanization was the issue, and it was a phenomenon on both sides of the Afghan border.  It was characterized by \"obscurantist views\" including sanctions for barbers who shaved men's beards, and opposition to music and television.  These Taliban elements were spreading through the Tribal Areas and into outside districts of Pakistan.  10.  (C) Musharraf noted that one obstacle he faced was a religious government in the NWFP that turned a blind eye to Talibanization.  Moreover, because the Chief Minister was with the opposition MMA, he had to work through the governor.  He said he was \"reasonably sure\" the situation would be remedied in the next election because the MMA would be \"wiped out.\"  He was confident the government would ultimately succeed in countering Talibanization because only a small minority of the population shared the Taliban's extreme views (albeit a dominant minority).  Pakistan was addressing the challenge of Talibanization with a four-pronged strategy, he  ISLAMABAD 00006420  003 OF 003   explained:  -- First, it was continuing military actions against terrorists and any Taliban clerics that were trying to run a government within a government, for example by requiring men to wear beards.  -- Second, on the political side, Pakistan was opening up the Tribal Areas to \"progressive political forces.\"  Without putting anything in writing, he had given tacit permission to these political parties to \"go in and do political work.\"  --Third, he was working to correct the \"administrative set-up.\"  Currently the FATA Secretariat (which represents the Tribal Areas and reports to the Chief Minister of the Northwest Frontier Province) was \"impotent.\" Moreover, the seven Political Agents (one for each Agency), who were supposed to be powerful and whose word used to be law, were not effective.  The government wanted to get the best people for the job, whether out of the military or the bureaucracy, and equip them effective security forces (tribal levies). This would give Political Agents independent authority so they would not have to fall back on the army or Frontier Corps.  Musharraf noted that one-time NWFP Chief Minister Sahibzada Imtiaz Ahmad was preparing a study on how to \"reactivate\" the Political Agents.  -- Fourth, efforts were already underway to end the physical and economic isolation of the tribal areas by building infrastructure (including roads and irrigation systems), generating jobs and building schools.  A \"massive\" construction effort was in the works; Pakistan had asked for $150 million per year in donor assistance, and would more than match that amount out of its own resources.  U.S.-backed \"Reconstruction Opportunity Zones\" (ROZs) also had great potential to create jobs and economic opportunity.  11.  (S) Musharraf said he hoped there would be equal efforts on the Afghan side of the border and complained that a perception had been created that Pakistan's government and its intelligence services were pursuing separate agendas.  It was a perception he found \"most annoying\" and one that the Indian intelligence service was spreading in Afghanistan. Musharraf said he had documentary evidence that India was working through Afghanistan's Ministry of Defense and its intelligence service to undermine Afghan perceptions of Pakistan; he had shown the evidence to President Bush during the President's visit to Pakistan.  India was also providing support and cash to \"feudal tribals\" who were making trouble in Balochistan.  12.  (U) Codel did not have an opportunity to clear this cable. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/17/2006 16:38", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 006647  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2016 TAGS: PREL, PTER, IN, IR, MNUC, PK SUBJECT: WITH SENATOR HAGEL, FOREIGN MINISTER KASURI PUSHES FOR CIVIL NUCLEAR TRANSFERS AND WARNS THAT A MILITARY ATTACK ON IRAN WOULD MEAN DISASTER FOR PAKISTAN   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S) Summary: In a meeting with Senator Hagel, Foreign Minister Kasuri urged that the United States help Pakistan address its civilian nuclear power needs.  He argued that \"transparent mechanisms\" now governing Pakistan's nuclear program would prevent the kinds of abuses associated with AQ Khan.  Kasuri admitted that the India civ-nuc deal had been briefed to Pakistan in advance.  On relations with India, Kasuri reported that \"no major differences\" remained on Siachen and Sir Creek; Indian PM Singh was expected to visit between July and September, and he expected an agreement would be reached by then.   He urged the U.S. to engage in a dialogue with Iran, warning that a military attack would be a disaster for Pakistan. As a perceived U.S. \"stooge,\" an attack would embarrass Pakistan in the Muslim world -- and it would inflame sectarian tensions.  Kasuri maintained that Iran's enrichment announcement was a publicity stunt and now that the Iranians had \"declared victory,\" it created an opportunity to \"humor them\" and convince them to go no further.   End Summary.  2.  (U) Foreign Minister Kasuri briefed visiting Senator Hagel (R-NE) on April 13 on Pakistan's perspective on nuclear issues, India and Iran.  Kasuri had participated in a preceding meeting with President Musharraf (septel) and used the opportunity to reinforce points made by Musharraf.  Nuclear Power -------------  3.  (S) Kasuri began by questioning the Civil Nuclear Initiative's exclusive focus on India.  Pakistan didn't understand U.S. motives or why it was in U.S. interests to entirely rule out transfers to Pakistan relating to its civilian nuclear power needs.  Pakistan would have to do whatever it had to do; any government would act similarly. The only consequence, from an American point of view, he said, was that Pakistan would have to buy from someone else, \"of course, under IAEA safeguards.\"  Why was it in the U.S. interest to let the Chinese or some other country garner that goodwill?  4.  (S) Nor did Kasuri understand the focus on AQ Khan.  Khan had operated with virtually no oversight.  There had been suspicions that he was living beyond his means, but the prevailing assumption had been that he was \"skimming\" from program funds.  The reality (that he was selling technology) didn't emerge because Khan had been given considerable autonomy in the days when Pakistan's program was covert.  He could order pickups and deliveries of shipments without anyone asking questions.  Kasuri said that Musharraf told him that before 1998 the program was strictly on a need to know basis, and even Musharraf, who was Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) at the time was unaware of operational details. That had changed when Pakistan declared its program in 1998, and Pakistan had moved to \"transparent mechanisms.\"   Kasuri argued that Khan was a lone proliferator, explaining that of the many areas that could have been affected, proliferation only occurred in those areas under Khan's authority.  Khan was currently under house arrest, Kasuri added.  5.  (C) Kasuri was clear that Pakistan had not been misled on the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative.  \"We were told about the deal in advance,\" he said, however one factor that had changed was that Pakistan was now realizing that its own need for nuclear energy was much higher than it had previously estimated.  6.  (C) Pakistan shared U.S. anti-proliferation goals, Kasuri said.  It did not want nuclear weapons capabilities to spread: \"we are the only Moslem country and don't want anyone else to get it.\"  7.  (C) Senator Hagel noted that he did not speak for the Administration or Congress, but that to his knowledge no one was blaming President Musharraf for the AQ Khan business. Nonetheless, Pakistan should not underestimate the damage Khan had done.  There was a deep perception in Congress that Pakistan had behaved irresponsibly and could not be trusted,  ISLAMABAD 00006647  002 OF 003   and that perception would be difficult to overcome.   Hagel also emphasized that it was important that the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative not be seen as marginalizing the relationship with Pakistan, which was \"a really indispensable relationship.\"  India -----  8.  (C) Kasuri commented that many of Pakistan's problems were linked to relations with India, so it was very significant that relations were improving and that both sides were using a new vocabulary on Kashmir.  Pakistan, in fact was now doing an about face, having recognized that its decades-long focus on international legality had not achieved anything.   Kasuri cited former Indian National Security Advisor Dixit's statement that the sides needed to think out of the box.  Prime Minister Singh, in his recent Amritsar speech had actually used Musharraf's language when he called for \"pragmatic and practical\" solutions.  The difference was that Musharraf had begun to explain what he means.  \"It looks like the sides are getting closer,\" Kasuri concluded, adding that Pakistan welcomed President Bush's mention of the Kashmir issue in Washington, New Delhi and Islamabad.  9.  (C) Kasuri noted that the two sides had come a long way, \"but have resolved nothing.\"  He remained hopeful, saying with regard to the Siachen and Sir Creek disputes, \"I have a feeling we can resolve these.\"  Prime Minister Singh would likely visit Pakistan between July and September, and he expected there would be an agreement on Siachen and Sir Creek by then; \"if not, it would be a major disappointment\" because \"we have no major differences.\" It was important, Kasuri added, that after all these years there should be some definitive progress, however limited.  Iran ----  10.  (C) Kasuri characterized Iran's enrichment announcement as \"ridiculous.\"  Iran's nuclear program was launched under the Shah -- well before Pakistan's -- and their enrichment capabilities were \"not a new thing.\"   The announcement had simply been a \"PR stunt,\" and might be the end of the story if the Iranians received appropriate attention.  Kasuri advised that the U.S. \"engage with them.\"  Iran had already declared a victory; the United States should \"humor them\" while ensuring that they go no further  11.  (C) The nuclear program transcended political divisions within Iran, Kasuri said.  Former Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi had told him that there were no differences on this issue, regardless of the government in power.  It was a matter of national pride:  \"the Indians, the Israelis, the Europeans, the Chinese, the Russians -- all these countries had it.\"  12.  (C) Kasuri reiterated that Pakistan shared the U.S. interest in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. President Musharraf had told Secretary Rice that he did not want Iran to acquire such a capability.  But the only way out was through dialogue.  Kasuri reported that during a visit to Pakistan, Ali Larijani, secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security Council, had asked Kasuri to talk to the Americans. Kasuri had said he would do so on one condition, that Iran's program had to be independently verifiable.  13. (C) \"We dread military action,\" Kasuri continued. Pakistan's nightmare scenario would be a U.S. attack, because Pakistan was seen as an American \"stooge\" and would be targeted by Iran for destabilizing activities -- along with Iraq and Afghanistan.  A military attack would be Pakistan's \"worst nightmare, an ultimate disaster.\"  Apart from the threat to political stability, the effect on oil prices could be catastrophic for Pakistan.  \"Don't scare the American people into feeling that America has to react militarily,\" he concluded, \"instead, engage them.  This is nothing new.\"  April 11 Karachi Bombing ------------------------   ISLAMABAD 00006647  003 OF 003   14.  (C) Kasuri noted that one reason Pakistan dreads any military action against Iran is that Shias are am important domestic constituency, accounting for 10-15 percent of the population.  The recent attack in Karachi illustrated a dangerous recent trend in sectarian violence.  There had been sectarian tension for 200 years, but of a different kind. The current strain of violence dated from the mid 1980s.  An attack on Iran would be widely viewed in Pakistan as \"yet another American attack on an Islamic country,\" but the reaction would be particularly violent among Shias.  \"And we are on Iran's border,\" Kasuri added.  15.  (C) Although the victims of the Karachi bombing were virtually all Sunnis, Kasuri said he didn't think Iran was behind the attack.  He speculated that the perpetrators could have been from an extremist Sunni group opposed to the brand of \"soft, Sufi Islam\" espoused by the victims.  Kasuri explained that the Sunni Tehrik group, whose leadership was decimated in the attack, had been \"brought to combat the influence of outsiders\" and to \"reestablish the South Asian identity\" of Islam in Pakistan.  16.  (U) Codel did not have an opportunity to clear this cable.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/24/2006 11:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 007164  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: A PRIMER ON PAKISTAN'S FEDERALLY ADMINISTERED TRIBAL AREAS (FATA)  ISLAMABAD 00007164  001.2 OF 005   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. Summary. This cable is intended to serve as a basic primer on Pakistan,s Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). The seven tribal agencies that make up the FATA are administratively, legally, and politically distinct from the rest of Pakistan. This primer focuses on these unique features of FATA, beginning with an updated snapshot of each Agency. Subsequent reporting in this series (septel) will feature in-depth looks at the political, military and development challenges and opportunities in this region.  End Summary.  A SNAPSHOT OF EACH AGENCY --------------------------  BAJAUR ------ Area: 1553 square kilometers Approximate Population (2005 est):  597,000 Major tribes:     Tarklani, Utman Khel, Safi Sub-tribes: Tarklani: Mamunds, Isozai, Ismailzai Utman Khel: Umar Khel, Asil Barang Khel, Gar Shamozai Federal Level Representation: 2 MNAs Key Leaders: Fahim Khan Wazir (Political Agent), Lal Karim (politically active businessman) Bismullah Khan (politically active businessman), Maulvi Mohammed Sadiq (influential religious leader, JUI-F politician), Maulana Khalilur Rehman (influential religious leader, JUI-F politician), Sahibzada Haroon Rasheed (JI activist and businessman) Average Literacy Rate*: (1998): 30% (male) 3% (female) Average Primary school enrollment* (2003): 68% (male) 12% (female) Economic potential: Emeralds, gypsum, small deposits of marble. Economic base: farming (potatoes, onions, tomatoes) USAID Development Projects: school construction, micro-credit, healthcare  * Agency-specific figures unavailable. Average for FATA used.  MOHMAND ------- Area: 2,296 square kilometers Approximate population (2005 est): 348,643 Major Tribe: Mohmand Sub-tribes: Musakhel, Tarakzai, Safi, UtmanKhel, Halimzai, Bhurhan Khel, Dawezai, Isa Khel Federal level political Representation: 2 MNAs Key Leaders: Dr. Jamal Nasir (Political Agent), Baroz Khan (former Parliamentarian, wealthy businessman), Abdur Rehman (former Parliamentarian, wealthy businessman) Average Literacy Rate*: (1998): 30% (male) 3% (female) Average Primary school enrollment* (2003): 68% (male) 12% (female) Economic potential: significant untapped marble deposits USAID Development Projects: school construction, water and sanitation, micro-credit, and healthcare  * Agency-specific figures unavailable. Average for FATA used.  KHYBER ------ Area: 2,576 square kilometers Approximate population (2005 est): 742,501 Major Tribes: Afridi, Mullagori, Shinwari, Shilmani Sub tribes:   Afridi: Qambar Khel, Malikdin Khel, Kuik Khel,Aka Khel, Zakha Khel, Sepa Khel, Kamar Khel, Adam Khel Shinwari: Ali Sher (in the Landi Kotal area) Federal level political representation: 2 MNAs, 2 Senators Key Leaders:  Fida Khan Wazir (Political Agent), Hafiz Abdul Malik Qadri & Noorul Haq Qadri (Religious leaders and  ISLAMABAD 00007164  002.2 OF 005   parliamentarians), Latif Afridi (ANP politician influential in Jamrud and Bajaur), Engineer Noor Alam Afridi (son of drug baron Ayub Afridi, Hameedullah Jan Afridi (Senator) Average Literacy Rate*: (1998): 30% (male) 3% (female) Average Primary school enrollment* (2003): 68% (male) 12% (female) Ecomomic base: transit trade, smuggling, arms manufacturing USAID Development Projects: school construction, teacher education scholarships, water and sanitation, micro-credit (underway), and healthcare  * Agency-specific figures unavailable. Average for FATA used.  ORAKZAI ------- Area: Population (2005 est): 276,792 Major Tribe: Orakzai Sub-tribes: Orakzai tribes are divided on Sunni-Shia sectarian lines. Three Tehsils--Upper Tehsil, Central Tehsil, and IsmailZai Tehsil are Sunni. Lower Tehsil is a mix of Sunni and Shia. Federal Level political representation: 2 MNAs, 2 Senators Key Leaders: Sher Alam Mehsud (Political Agent), Dr. Sayed Ghazi Gulab Jamal (Federal Minister of Tourism, scion of a military family), Said Munir Mian (influential in religious circles), Syed Muhammad Hussain (Senator) Literacy Rate: (1998): 19.6 (male) 1.28 (female) Primary school Enrollment (2003): 58% (male) 13.6% (female) Middle School Enrollement (2003): 14.2% (male) 1.6% (female) Economic base: agriculture (fruit trees, rice, and barley) USAID Projects: school construction, micro-credit, and healthcare  KHURRAM ------ Area: 1500 square kilometers Population (2005 est): 545,415 Major Tribes: Chamkani, Masuzai, Alisherzai, Zaimukh, Turi, and Bangash Federal Level Political Representation: 2 MNAs, 2 Senators Key Leaders:  Salim Khan Mohmand (Political Agent), Haji Muni Orakzai (popular politician and wealthy businessman), Syed Sajjid Hussain Mia (popular Shia community leader with close ties to Iran), Rashid Ahmed Khan (Senator) Literacy Rate: (1998): 33% (male) 4.5% (female) Primary school Enrollment (2003): 75% (male) 23% (female) Middle School Enrollement (2003): 23.2% (male) 6% (female) Economic base: rice, apple and grape orchards USAID Projects: School construction (13 schools under construction), micro-credit (underway), healthcare  North Waziristan ---------------- Area: 4,707 Population (2005 est): 438,770 Major Tribes: Wazir, Daur Sub tribe:    Wazir: Utmanzai Tribes by area: Wazir--primarily in Ramzak, Datta khel, and Shawal                 Daur--primarily in Miram Shah, Mir Ali, Edak, Humaz, and Hasukhel Federal Level Political Representation: 2 MNAs, 2 Senators Key Leaders:  Zaheerul Islam (Political Agent),  Maulana Deendar (MNA and very influential religious leader closely associated with JUI-F), Maulvi Nek Zaman (MNA, influential religious leader) Average Literacy Rate*: (1998): 30% (male) 3% (female) Average Primary school enrollment* (2003): 68% (male) 12% (female) Economic base: largely barren, economy is mostly smuggling-based USAID Projects: School construction (delayed due to security), micro-credit, healthcare  ISLAMABAD 00007164  003.2 OF 005    * Agency-specific figures unavailable. Average for FATA used.  South Waziristan ---------------- Area: 6,220 square kilometers Population (2005 est): 501,655 Major tribes: Wazir, Mahsud Subtribe:     Wazir: Ahmedzai, Federal Level Political Representation: 2 MNAs, 0 Senators Key Leaders:  Munir Alam, (Political Agent), Alam Jan Mehsud (retired General and father of the Orakzai Political Agent), Maulana Noor Mohammed Wazir (JUI-F politician with reported links to Taliban and Al Qaida), Muhammad Meraj-ud Din (JUI-F politician with reported links to Taliban and Al Qaida), Mateen Shah (ex-Senator, wealthy businessman) Literacy Rate: (1998): 32.5% (male) 2.57% (female) Primary school Enrollment (2003): 46% (male) 6% (female) Middle School Enrollement (2003): 6.1% (male) .04% (female) Economic base: timber and trucking  Administrative Hodgepodge -------------------------- 3. (C//NF) The FATA is divided into seven administrative territories, or \"Agencies\": Mohmand, Khyber, Orakzai, Khurram, North Waziristan and South Waziristan.  As a region, it lies outside of the elected, legal, and administrative bounds that govern each of the four provinces of Pakistan. Technically a federal territory, it is supposed to be governed by the Federal Ministry for States and Frontiers (SAFRON). The SAFRON Ministry's charter charges it with directing all federal interaction with the FATA, asserting administrative and political control, and overseeing development plans and policy directives. In reality, chronic indifference and a lack of control at the SAFRON ministry has resulted in the shift of FATA responsibilities to a labyrinth of federal, provincial (NWFP) and local actors that seek to assert influence over FATA; none has effective or complete control.  4. (C//NF) Provincially, the FATA is currently administered by the NWFP Governor and his \"FATA Secretariat\". The NWFP Governor has the power to oversee all administrative, legal, and economic decisions made for FATA.  In 2002, former NWFP Governor Ifthikar Shah established the FATA Secretariat to consolidate the political and development functions disbursed through several provincial cabinet ministries. It was also created as a follow-on to the now defunct FATA development cooperation, which was seen as corrupt and inefficient. When Governor Khalilur Rehman took office in March 2005, he strengthened the administrative powers of the FATA Secretariat, envisioning it as a place to coordinate and  SIPDIS implement long-term development plans, and ensure accountability in the Political Agents' running of each Agency. Governor Rehman announced that his goal was to break the control of drug mafias, warlords and what he referred to in 2004 as the \"stranglehold\" of the mullahs by improving educational opportunities, increasing funding for development, winning over warlords, and eliminating FATA,s isolation. Actual implementation of this plan has been faulty, as the Governor's control has been weak, and the Secretariat has been mired in bureaucracy and in all  SIPDIS likelihood, corruption.  5. (U) Administrative and judicial powers are carried out by a mid-level bureaucrat from the GOP's District Management group, the Political Agent (PA), and several Deputy PAs. Under the administrative system created by the British colonial government, each PA was appointed federally and approved by the NWFP governor. His key role was to ensure tribal loyalty to the government, prevent intra- and inter-tribal disputes, and dole out provincial and federal funding to tribal chiefs as he saw fit.  PAs hold the powers of Magistrate, Sessions Judge, and implementing agent for  ISLAMABAD 00007164  004.2 OF 005   Federal Government Orders. Traditionally, PAs have relied on the good-will and assistance of Tribal Chiefs, which they often bought with bribes and offers of greater funds for the tribe. PAs also needed assistance from the levy and Khasdar (militia) forces in their Agency to administer law and order.  Over time, the influence of PAs over tribes has waned and they have been seen as corrupt and out-of-step with tribal interests. Tribes often put more stock into decisions made by a jirga (a tribal council of elders empowered with decision-making and negotiating authority by a tribe or the Agency population) or their increasingly influential religious leaders than the decisions and threats made by Political Agents. The financial leverage Political Agents hold over tribes may also hold less sway today than it once did, largely due to the income provided by smuggling and other illicit activities.  Legal Muddle ------------ 6. (U) Constitutionally, laws passed by the GOP do not apply in FATA.  FATA residents cannot seek legal redress in either NWFP's provincial courts or the federal judiciary because neither has jurisdiction there.  The GOP's \"Criminal Procedure Code,\" which underpins the foundation of Criminal Law in Pakistan does not fully apply in FATA and is often supplanted by Frontier Crimes Regulation (FCR), an arcane code of laws that relies on the principle of collective punishment to prevent (and punish) crimes ranging from banditry and crime to harboring fugitives and being \"unfriendly to the government\". Punishments include: arresting family members of perpetrators, demolishing houses or villages found in violation of codes, levying fines on households or imposing economic blockades. For example, houses found to harbor fugitives can be demolished after one warning.  FCR does not allow the right to appeal sentences or judgments at the High Court or Supreme Court level.  7. (U) When the Political Agent (or tribe) chooses, civil and criminal disputes can be solved by a jirga--a council of elders. According to the FCR, the Political Agent can choose to depute the powers of magistrate to a council of elders, when either of the parties in a dispute belongs to a frontier tribe, or, when the crime is likely to cause a blood feud. The jirga implements decisions either based on Pakhtunwali tribal code, Sharia, or a combination thereof.  Decisions by the jirga are final and cannot be appealed. Jirgas are also used to settle inter-tribal disputes and disputes between the government and a tribe (or individual).  Stone-Age Development --------------------- 8.  (SBU) In terms of social, economic and political development, the FATA and its neighboring Provincially Administered Tribal Areas are the least developed regions in Pakistan. According to the 1998 census, less than 18 percent of the population is literate (compared to a national average of 48 percent), and less than 20 percent of males and 6 percent of females (on average) make it past primary school. Access to health care (1  bed per 1450 people and 1 doctor for 1529 patients), clean water, sanitation, electricity and irrigation is also abysmal, putting parts of FATA figuratively and realistically \"back in the stone age.\"  9. (SBU) Political development in the FATA has traditionally been rooted in a tribal culture of collective decision-making by un-elected maliks. Political party activity is banned in the region, though representatives of the religio-political party, Jamaat-e Ulema-e Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F), have a base in tribal politics because many mosque-leaders are members of the party and disseminate the party line at weekly prayer services. In 1996, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto introduced elections in the FATA by calling for the election of eight tribal Ministers of the National Assembly (MNAs).  Prior to this election, tribal elders represented  ISLAMABAD 00007164  005.2 OF 005   each agency. In 1997, MNAs were chosen by universal adult franchise. In 2002, the election resulted in the election of 12 nominally-independent MNAs and 8 nominally independent Senators (most vote in line with the JUI-F and the Islamist MMA alliance). The government uses statistics (such as the lower-than-average voter turnout (approximately 45% in 2002) and the negligible turnout of women) to argue that the tribal system in FATA does not allow for \"one man, one vote\" style elections, an argument it continues to posit today to explain the dearth of political party activity in the FATA. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/27/2006 5:41", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 007423   USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MHAMES/R.JERESKI USDOC FOR 3131/USFCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR BOBETTE ORR/RKREISSL  STATE FOR EB/ESP  U.S. CUSTOMS HQ FOR STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS  HONG KONG FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: BMGT, ETTC, PK  SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST-SHIPMENT VERIFICATION CHECK: ADVANCED ENGINEERING RESEARCH ORGANIZATION. (NO LICENSE REQUIRED)  1. On March 7, 2006, EconOff and FCS FSN visited Advanced Engineering Research Organization (AERO), located at Air Weapons Complex (AWC), Haripur Road, Wah. The purpose of the visit was to conduct a Post Shipment Verification check on the shipment of a \"Digital Compass Module\" exported by GECS, Inc., 500 Dobbin Court, Accokeek, MD 20607.   2. At the AERO facility, the USG staff met with Wing Commander (Retired) Muhammad Anwar Hamid, Director Logistics (Tel: 92-51-90182015, Fax: 92-51-90187228, Email: janjua742@hotmail.com, Cellphone: 92-300-5005917). Wing Cdr. Hamid, along with two other technical staff, spent approximately twenty minutes explaining the end use of the three sets of Honeywell HMR 3000 compass modules he had displayed on his desk.  According to Hamid, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) is installing these modules in an attempt to increase the navigational accuracy of its Mirage fleet.  The PAF is not satisfied with the accuracy of the Chinese-made \"flex valves\" currently used in its aircraft.  The compass modules are still in a testing phase; PAF will decide whether or not to install the modules in its entire fleet upon completion of the testing.  AERO says it will purchase dozens more compass modules, but not necessarily from a U.S. company, if the testing results in increased navigational accuracy.   3.  USG staff also questioned Hamid about the role of AERO. According to Hamid, AERO is an independent research and consultancy division under the Ministry of Defense; its sole client is the PAF.  Hamid stated that AERO is co-located with the Air Weapons Complex (AWC), but works independently of it.  The USG staff noted concern about the time (first access request sent to AERO in June 2005) it had taken to schedule the AERO PSV.  Hamid said that he would bring this to the attention of his superior officers and would look into streamlining the procedure for any future checks. Hamid stated that scheduling took so long because AERO had to first get approval from Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) to grant USG officials access; it was the MFA who contacted USG officials to schedule the PSV.  It may be noted that AERO is located approximately 60 km NE of Islamabad and AERO provided a roundtrip-armed escort to the USG staff on this visit; as a result, USG staff had no difficulty accessing the facility.   4. It seemed apparent from the discussion with AERO officials that the PAF uses the compass modules for navigational purposes.  The AERO reps seemed knowledgeable about the PAF's future requirements and Hamid gave a brief talk on the PAF's new JF-7 aircraft that are being manufactured with Chinese collaboration.  It must be noted, however, that aside from the main office building, USG officials did not visit (nor ask to do so) any other locations on the AWC compound.  Apparently, AERO and AWC are part of Pakistan's military establishment and certain restrictions apply for non-military personnel visiting this site.   5. Recommendation: At this time Post does not have any adverse information on AERO and has no evidence that the item listed in this PSV check has been used for any application other than that stated by the AERO officials. However, AERO is located within the same extended compound as the Air Weapons Complex, which is a classified military site.  Based on our meeting with AERO and the scant information that we have on this organization, at this time Post is not in a position to confirm nor challenge the reliability of AERO as an end user of higher-end U.S. technology.  Crocker   NNNN  End Cable Text " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/28/2006 4:54", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 007505  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PGOV, PREL, IRNB SUBJECT: CABINET RESHUFFLE BRINGS PROMOTIONS, DEMOTIONS, AND NEW FACES  1. (SBU) Summary. After several weeks of speculation, Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz has selected some bright party stars, rewarded PML loyalists, and switched the portfolios of four ministers in a cabinet reshuffle on April 26. Presiding over a ceremony at Aiwan-e Sadar, President Musharraf and Aziz swore in six new Federal Ministers and three new Ministers of State. In a nod to \"good governance,\" Sheikh Rashid, a controversial figure at the Information Ministry, was switched to the Ministry of Railways, and low-performer Faisal Saleh Hayat was moved to the Ministry of Environment. Their retention in the Cabinet is out of political necessity; PML needs PPP-Patriots (Hayat's Party) and Rashid's influence in Rawalpindi in the 2007 election. The two new Ministries--Interprovincial Provincial Affairs and Political Affairs--also reflect the political needs of the hour: a unified strategy for dealing with deteriorating center-provincial relations (Inter-provincial Affairs), strengthening PML and building political alliances head of the 2007 election (Political Affairs). All of the new members are PML. End summary.  CABINET CHANGES --------------- 2. (SBU) Cabinet Block officially announced late Tuesday evening that the following changes have been made to Shaukat Aziz's Cabinet:  Federal Ministers: Minister for Information              Mohammad Ali Durrani Minister for Railways                 Sheikh Rashid Ahmed Minister for Tourism                  Nilofar Bakhtiar Minister for Privatization            Zahid Hamid Minister for Youth Affairs            Sumaira Malik (also Advisor to the PM on Womens' Development) Minister for Political Affairs        Amir Muqam Minister for Environment              Faisal Saleh Hayat Minister for Kashmir Affairs          Major Tahir Iqbal Minister for Sports                   Shamim Haider Minister for Culture                  GG Jamal  Minsters of State (MoS): MoS for Information                   Tariq Azeem Khan MoS for Education                     Anisa Zeb Tahir Kheli MoS for Minorities                    Mushtaq Victor MoS for Defense                       Khalid Lund MoS for Parliamentary Affairs         Kamal Ali Agha Mos for Overseas Pakistanis           Raza Hayat Hiraj MoS for Interior                      Zafar Warraich MoS for Youth Affairs                 Ghulam Bibi Bharwana  BIO HIGHLIGHTS -------------- 3. (SBU) The following is a brief sketch of the Cabinet members whose portfolios have been elevated, as well as the three new members:  Muhammad Ali Durrani (Minister of Information): Durrani is an up-and-coming leader in PML, which he joined in 2002 after helping to merge the Milat Party with the ruling PML. He formerly served as the Secretary General of the Milat Party and National Party. In 2004, he was made the MoS for Youth, Culture, and Sports and has served as a Special Advisor to the Prime Minister. He is said to have the backing of ISI. He is a Mechanical Engineer and Educator by profession. He speaks fluent English, Urdu, Punjabi, Seraiki, and Pashto.  Salim Saifullah Khan (Minister for Intra-Provincial Affairs): Saifullah was selected for his political influence not only in NWFP, but in Sindh and Balochistan as well. He is a first-term Senator (elected March 2006) but long-time politician. He was PML Secretary General until 2002 but lost position and influence in the party after the rise of Chaudhary Shujaat. He has served as a Federal Minister under PM Junejo and a Provincial Minister in NWFP. His brother Anwar was a long-term PPP politician. According to his  ISLAMABAD 00007505  002 OF 003   official bio, his family hails from a long line of Khans from Ghor, Afghanistan. He is a graduate of Carnegie Mellon University.  Engineer Amir Muqam (Minister for Political Affairs): Muqam is a first-term MNA from Shangla, Swat. He comes from an influential family in NWFP, and has served as an informal advisor to the PM and President on FATA while serving as the Minister of State for Water and Power. Between 2001-2002, he served as the Union Council Nazim from Bengalin. Muqam has a BSC from the University of Engineering and Technology in Peshawar. He was born on July 25, 1963; he is married with four sons and two daughters. PML leaders are seeking to boost Muqam and the provincial NWFP PML party he heads ahead of the 2007 elections.  Sumaira Malik (Minister for Youth; Advisor on Womens' Development): Malik is a first-term MNA from Kushab, Punjab. She hails from a politically influential feudal family. Her uncle is former President Farooq Leghari, her brother-in-law is Sardar Yar Mohammad Rind, and her sister is fellow first term MNA Aiyla Malik. Her husband is reportedly a high-ranking civil servant in the influential District Management Group.  Sumaira served as the Minister of State for Tourism from 2004-2006, and is being rewarded for her loyalty to the party; some also say her promotion is a nod to Leghari, whose support PML needs in 2007. Maik was born on December 19, 1963.  Zahid Hamid Khan (Minister for Privatization): Khan is a first-term PML MNA from the successful, business-oriented Sialkot district. He is a practicing lawyer, a former member of the Civil Service, and an industrialist. Hamid holds a BA and MA from Cambridge University, and an LLB from the University of Punjab. He previously served as Minister of State for Defense, and is being rewarded for his loyalty to PML during the contentious local bodies elections in Sialkot.  Nilofar Bakhtiar (Minister of Tourism): Bakhtiar has served as the Prime Minister's Advisor on Womens' Development since 2004. She has also been in charge of the Ministry of Womens Affairs, Social Development, and Special Education (though she was not officially a Minister). Bakhtiar won a Senate seat in March 2006.  Professor Mushtaq Victor (Minister of State for Minorities): Victor is a first-term MNA from Sialkot and holds a seat reserved for minorities (he is Christian). He has previously served as an MPA from Punjab. During his first term as MNA, he was appointed the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Minority Affairs. He was a member of PPP until 2002, when he became politically aligned with PML.  He is a Professor of History, who received his MA from the University of Punjab in 1972. He was born on March 20, 1942 and is married with two sons and two daughters.  Kamil Ali Agha (Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs): Senator Agha is a long-time politician, who has earned the favor of parties across the political spectrum. He most recently served as the Chief Whip in the Senate, and is well respected for his ability to keep discussions moving civilly. He was first elected district Councillor in 1979, and again in 1990, and deputy Nazim in 1990. In 1997, he was elected to the National Assembly, and served as the Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs. In 2003, he was elected to the  SIPDIS Senate. He is reportedly allied with the Chief Minister of Punjab and has been selected for his statesmanly performance in the Senate.  He is a lawyer by profession.  Khalid Lund (Minister of State for Defense): Lund is a third-term MNA from Ghotki, Punjab.  Until two weeks ago, he was a member of the PPP-Patriots; he defected and joined PML.  In his first two terms as MNA, he was a member of the PPP. He is an agriculturalist by profession. He is being rewarded with the Ministerial position in return for his defection  ISLAMABAD 00007505  003 OF 003   from the Patriots.  COMMENT ------- 4. (SBU) Three of the new inductees filled slots vacated by the March 2006 Senate Election; the other positions were shuffled to punish bad performance and reward party stars and loyalists. Following through with his August 2004 pledge for good-governance, Aziz appears to be responding to PML Rawalpindi boss Sheikh Rashid's dismal performance as Minister of Information and PPP-Patriot Faisal Saleh Hayat's non-performance at the Ministry of Kashmir and Northern Areas. Their retention in the Cabinet (albeit in less important portfolios) is a nod to the political reality that both are still inflential politicians whose support PML needs in the 2007 elections. The creation of an Inter-Provincial Liaison portfolio (Saifullah) reflects the GOP's recognition that there needs to be a unified strategy for dealing with deteriorating center-provincial relations (particularly Balochistan and FATA). Muqam's new Ministry (Political Affairs) was presumably created to orchestrate party \"understandings\" for the 2007 election and give the non-political PM Aziz another political advisor. We expect that this will not be the last Cabinet reshuffle, as the ruling party lines up its team for the 2007 elections. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/28/2006 11:01", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 007537  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2016 TAGS: KNNP, MCAP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST NOTIFICATION  REF: IIR 6 873 02XX 06  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  On April 28, 2005, MFA Disarmament Cell Director Muhammad Kamran Akhtar notified poloff that Pakistan would conduct a ballistic missile test on April 29-30 over the Arabian Sea.  Akhtar said that the GOP has sent written notification to the Government of India regarding this missile test, per the bilateral notification agreement of October 2005. The MFA has also advised the Governments of Afghanistan, China and Iran of that it will conduct a ballistic missile test on these dates.  2.  (S)  On April 26, 2005, the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) received notification (reported septel) from Pakistan Air Force (PAF) Headquarters advising of an airspace closure over the Arabian Sea due to \"a PAF operational exercise.\"  The coordinates for that exercise match the area described in the MFA's oral notification to poloff. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/28/2006 15:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 007563  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2016 TAGS: PREL, MARR, PK, AF, PTER SUBJECT: SIXTEENTH MEETING OF U.S.-AFGHANISTAN-PAKISTAN TRIPARTITE COMMISSION  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.   1.  (C) Summary:  The Tripartite Commission (TPC) Met at GHQ in Rawalpindi April 19 -- the third Tripartite conducted at the four-star level and the second official visit to Pakistan by Afghanistan's Chief of the General Staff.  Atmospherics were favorable, continuing a trend seen in earlier TPC meetings. Key outcomes included agreement to hold a counter-IED symposium in May at Bagram for Coalition, Afghan and Pakistani participants, agreement to post Afghan and Pakistani intelligence LNOs at CFC-A HQ, with the long-term goal of moving these intel LNOs to Bagram after a validation period, a personal invitation from the ANA G-2 for his Pakistani counterpart (DGMI) to visit him in Kabul, and a summary of the inaugural Afghan-Pakistani Confidence Building Seminar, held in March at the Marshall Center in Germany. All three sides briefed their roles and provided an update on Operation Mountain Lion.  Pakistani and Afghan participants acknowledged the significance of the ANA participation in Exercise Inspired Gambit scheduled for 1-12 May.  All sides expressed support for accepting NATO-ISAF as a full member of the Tripartite Commission and for expanding the Border Subcommittee to include the southern border region -- though on both issues, the Pakistanis indicated they need to work internally before the GOP can offer official concurrence. End Summary.  2.  (U) Participants met in Rawalpindi on April 19, 2006 for the 16th Tripartite Commission (TPC) Plenary Session. The Pakistani and Afghan sides were led at the four star level by Vice Chief of Army Staff General Ahsan Hyat and ANA Chief of General Staff General Bismullah Khan respectively.  CFC-A Commander Lt General Karl Eikenberry led the U.S. side. Others participating on the Pakistani side included Pakistan's Ambassador in Kabul Tariq Aziz Ud Din, Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) MG Muhammad Yousaf, Incoming DGMO MG Ahmed Shuja Pasha, Director General of Military Intelligence MG Nadeem Taj, Director of Military Operations BG Nasser Khan Janjua, and Director of Military Intelligence BG Raza Muhammad.  The Afghan side included ANA Chief of Operations Lt Gen Sher Karimi, DG of the Afghan Border Police LG Haroon Asefi, Ambassador to Pakistan Nangulalai Tarzi and ANA Chief of Intelligence MG Abdul Khaliq.  U.S. participants included MG Benjamin Freakley and BG James Terry.  BG Richard Tabor represented NATO/ISAF.  3.  (C) Atmospherics at the TPC were favorable, helped by a dinner the previous evening hosted by General Ahsan at his residence.  On the morning of the TPC, General Bismullah was received with full honors.  During the meeting, both sides spoke repeatedly of \"brotherly relations\" and the need for trust and improved coordination at the operational level. General Ahsan opened the meeting by stressing that Pakistan remained committed to good relations with Afghanistan, adding that the two countries faced a common enemy opposed to peace in the region.  General Bismullah expressed appreciation for Pakistan's efforts in the border regions and offered condolences for Pakistan Army \"shahids\" who had been killed in Waziristan.  Underscoring that the two countries shared common interests in regional stability, he urged Pakistan to focus increased attention on border areas in the south, where Taliban and Al Qa'ida elements were infiltrating and destabilizing Afghanistan's southern provinces.  Lt. General Eikenberry noted the shift of international operations toward NATO/ISAF, explaining that at the end of July MG Freakley would wear two hats as both as operational commander of Regional Command East and as Deputy Commander under NATO/ISAF.  Border Security Subcommittee ----------------------------  4.  (C) BG Terry briefed on progress in the Border Security Subcommittee Meeting (BSSM), including improving communications capabilities connecting the two sides.  A secure computer system now links CJTF-76 HQ and Pakistani counterparts, and a secure, high-frequency radio system expected to be delivered by early May will give Coalition units the ability to coordinate directly with Pakistani units on the other side of the border.  BG Nasser observed that the frequency of border violations had declined and that all sides recognized the \"sanctity of borders.\"  He noted the  ISLAMABAD 00007563  002 OF 003   killing in Afghanistan of seventeen Pakistanis and Afghan assurances that \"necessary action\" would be taken.  Lt. General Eikenberry noted that as the BSSM expanded to cover Regional Command South it would confront a different configuration of deployments and threats.  General Ahsan, while supportive in principle, said that this transition would require careful thought, given that in Pakistan's 12th Corps region (Balochistan) the geography and demographics were very different than in the 11th Corps region (the Tribal Areas).  Given that the area was very sparsely populated, there would be an increased need for surveillance capability and mobility.  \"We need to get together and get deeper into it,\" he concluded.  Military Intelligence Sharing Working Group -------------------------------------------  5.   (C) Following an update on the Military Intelligence Subcommittee, General Ahsan noted that there was a need for a deeper understanding of principles relating to intelligence, which should be \"preventive, preemptive and predictive.\"  The Afghan side stressed the need for better intelligence and communication on the recruitment and deployment of suicide bombers.  The Pakistanis emphasized the need to deploy liaison officers quickly and the importance of tracking and blocking weapons trafficking, which was affecting law and order in Balochistan with direct implications for stability in bordering areas of Afghanistan.  Lt. General Eikenberry noted that with respect to intelligence cooperation, other national agencies were also involved and it would be important to avoid redundancy.  There was a tentative agreement to post Afghan and Pakistani intelligence LNOs at CFC-A HQ, with the long-term goal of moving these intel LNOs to Bagram after a validation period.  Counter IED Working Group -------------------------  6. (C) After a presentation on the way ahead on counter-IED cooperation and a comparative assessment of counter IED capabilities, the Pakistani and Afghan sides commended progress in the Working Group and agreed that IEDs represented a common threat.  General Ahsan responded to an Afghan request for technical assistance by saying Pakistan, after suffering significant losses of its own, had developed safety measures and procedures that it would share.  He also stressed the need to target the full IED supply chain, beginning with funding sources.   A Counter-IED Symposium, jointly hosted by CFC-A and ARCENT, will be held at the end of May at Bagram, and attended by Coalition, Afghan and Pakistani participants.  Operation Mountain Lion -----------------------  7.  (C) Lt. General Karimi briefed on ANA and Coalition shaping and border operations, explaining that the ANA's 201st, 203rd and 205th Corps were participating in the operation with coalition forces.  201st Corps is participating as part of the Coalition main effort, with battalions conducting Joint Patrolling and Offensive Operations in Pech and Korengal Valleys; 203d Corps is conducting joint border operations in Khowst, Paktika and Zabol Provinces, and 205th Corps is conducting shaping operations in southern Afghanistan.  8.  (C) BG Nasser reviewed Pakistani deployments in support of Operation Mountain Lion, including:  -- Blocking positions established at 3 locations (Arandu, Chitral; Bin Shahi, Dir; Nawa Pass, Bajaur) -- to interdict key infiltration routes --133 Army and Frontier Corps posts in the area -- 7 Frontier Corps Wings already deployed to Chitral/Dir/Bajaur -- Additional units moved in to support Operation Mountain Lion, including:         - 2 Army Infantry Battalions (one pulled from           the earthquake area)         - 3 FC Wings         - 1 SOTF Company  ISLAMABAD 00007563  003 OF 003           - 1 Medium Artillery Battalion     - 3 Mortar batteries         - SSG and Aviation support from Peshawar are           also available as required         - a total of approximately 3000 personnel deployed  9.  (C) BG Nasser also reviewed operations in the tribal areas since the last TPC on February 26:  -- March 1: Nur Payo Khan (Sedgai), 45 enemy KIA; 46 enemy WIA -- March 4: Miram Shah and Mir Ali, 65-70 enemy KIA -- March 7: Miram Shah Operations to destroy militant madrassas and militants' buildings -- March 10: Khatti Kili (Sadiq Noor Compound), 25-30 enemy KIA -- April 4: Operation Mana, 40  enemy KIA; 19 apprehended -- April 12: Operation Naghar, 13 enemy KIA; (including HVT Abdul Rehman; 7 foreigners KIA) -- Total of 25 militant houses demolished during the time period.  Looking ahead, Nasser explained that \"jeepable\" tracks in the border area would be blocked, sweep operations and \"snap\" operations by SSG and SOTF would continue, Miram Shah and Mir Ali would remain a \"weapons free declared\" area and a night curfew would be imposed in border areas.  Also, a political process would be implemented alongside military operations.  Confidence Building Seminars -------------------------  10.  (C) ANA J-2 Col. Salahuddin praised the recent joint Pakistan-Afghanistan seminar in Germany, saying that by the end of the session participants on both sides had overcome suspicions and become friends.  Pakistani LTC Dar, also a Garmisch participant, echoed Salahuddin's views on the confidence-building value of the seminars. CFC explained that two sessions would be held annually over the next five years, focusing on field grade officers and officers serving in the border regions.  Tripartite Way Ahead --------------------  11.  (C) Summing up, Lt. General Eikenberry noted that key areas to address were structural issues relating to the next steps in the intelligence sharing working group and the expansion of the BSSM to the south (involving Pakistan's 12th Corps and Frontier Corp).  He proposed that representatives from all sides meet in Pakistan to agree on modalities.  He reassured the Pakistani side that the expansion of NATO/ISAF would not mean a diminution in U.S. capability; the U.S. would still provide the most  \"boots on the ground,\" contributing on intelligence and air support, among other areas.  He expressed the hope that at the next Tripartite in June, NATO/ISAF could be brought in as a full partner. General Ahsan was agreeable in principle on the expansion of the BSSM to the South but indicated that Pakistan would have to vet this concept through the Joint Staff before final approval.  On full NATO membership starting with the June Tripartite, Gen. Ahsan said this would \"in all probability\" occur, but would also require formal approval.  General Ahsan voiced his satisfaction that the ANA would participate in the U.S.-Pakistan Exercise Inspired Gambit.  General Bismullah Khan, invited Pakistani  DGMO-designate MG  Pasha to visit Afghanistan, emphasized the importance of trust in achieving common goals and again sought to draw Pakistan's attention to the southern border region.  12. (U) CFC-A Commander Lt General Karl Eikenberry cleared this cable. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/28/2006 15:13", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 007564  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK, PGOV, MASS, MOPS, PTER, MCAP SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR S/CT AMBASSADOR CRUMPTON  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S) The U.S. Mission in Pakistan warmly welcomes your planned May 3-4 visit to Pakistan.  As demonstrated during President Bush's visit to Islamabad, both President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward Musharraf's goal of \"enlightened moderation.\" They viewed the President's visit as a landmark in the relationship and were gratified that he decided to stay overnight in Pakistan.  Your visit comes as Pakistan's leaders have weathered the fallout from the Danish cartoon controversy, but continue to be challenged by violent separatists in Balochistan, al-Qa'ida and extremists in the tribal areas along the Afghan border, and the transition from earthquake relief operations to long-term reconstruction. Robust USG participation in the earthquake relief effort has promoted a more positive public perception of the United States, but Pakistan remains a tough public diplomacy environment.  We believe that your visit will help advance key U.S. objectives, including democratization, regional stability, and progress in the global war on terror.  U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership ----------------------------------- 2. (S) During his March visit to Pakistan, President Bush launched a U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership.  This initiative has been institutionalized in the framework of a Strategic Dialogue that incorporates discussions on: economic growth and prosperity, energy cooperation, peace and security, social sector development, science and technology, democracy, and non-proliferation.  In the wake of President Bush's visit, and with the prospect of a U.S.-India civil nuclear deal, Pakistan's political class has been wracked by a bout of insecurity and \"me-tooism.\" Even President Musharraf has complained privately that there is now a public perception that the U.S. is distancing itself from him.  The inaugural meeting of the Strategic Dialogue will be held in Washington from April 26-27, and should help reassure Pakistan of the breadth and depth of our long-term commitment.  The Cartoon Controversy ----------------------- 3. (C) In February and early March, tens of thousands of Pakistani demonstrators took to the streets to protest the publication of the Danish cartoons.  Early rallies in Lahore and Peshawar were particularly destructive, with rampant looting and vandalism in parts of downtown Lahore and Peshawar and six protesters killed.  Although demonstrations followed across Pakistan, enhanced security measures by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) prevented any repetition of the unrestrained violence seen in February.  Over time, the protests took on a greater political tone, as opportunistic politicians sought to embarrass the Musharraf government. The protests have died out but it took Federal government intervention to quell them.  Following President Bush's lead, your visit presents an opportunity to remind the Pakistani people that the United States understands the sentiments of the Muslim community and that, although we strongly support freedom of expression, we also believe the press should behave responsibly.  Earthquake Relief ----------------- 4. (U) The October 8 earthquake (7.6 on the Richter scale) in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was the strongest to hit the region in over a century.  The GOP estimates that more than 73,000 died in the quake, with more than 69,000 wounded and some 2.8 million left homeless.  The United States had been Pakistan's most visible international partner in delivering emergency relief during the sixth month effort.  5. (U) The U.S. military, which had been on the ground since October 10, concluded its relief operations on March 31.  At the peak of initial relief efforts, more than 1,200 personnel and 24 helicopters provided vital transport, logistics, and  ISLAMABAD 00007564  002 OF 004   medical and engineering support in affected areas.  As we wrapped up our military relief operations, we donated more than USD 2.5 million in medical equipment to Pakistani counterparts.  Our Seabee unit also left behind 25 pieces of heavy construction equipment as a donation to Pakistani military engineers.  6. (U) The U.S. military and USAID collaborated closely on the civilian relief effort, with the military providing logistics and USAID working with NGOs to deliver supplies and services to camps and villages.  USAID provided more than USD 60 million in additional humanitarian assistance through NGOs and the United Nations, including the donation of blankets, tents, plastic sheeting and shelter kits to the affected population.  In March, USAID made its first reconstruction grant of USD 15 million to rebuild schools and hospitals.  In total, the USG has pledged USD 510 million for earthquake relief and reconstruction efforts.  The U.S. private sector is also engaged.  A consortium of CEOs (GE, Pfizer, Citigroup, Xerox and UPS) is spearheading the South Asia Earthquake Relief Fund, which has already attracted approximately USD 24 million.  Independent estimates place total U.S. private donations at over USD 130 million.  7. (C) Our prompt and generous response sparked a perceptible shift in Pakistani attitudes about the United States that has improved bilateral relations at official levels.  The cooperation between U.S. and Pakistani military personnel has palpably reduced suspicions at the middle and upper ranks of the Pakistani army.  Throughout the draw-down of our military presence, we emphasized that our transition parallels the shift from emergency relief toward the civilian reconstruction phase of the recovery effort.  The Pakistanis, who have long been convinced that we are fair-weather friends, are beginning to understand that we are committed to a long-term relationship.  Democratization --------------- 8. (C) President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007. The government must address significant organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, but it has taken an important initial step with the March appointment of a permanent, independent election commissioner acceptable to all mainstream parties.  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  9. (C) Press commentary following A/S Boucher's April 4-6 visit to Pakistan gave considerable attention to his public remarks, including his observation that the United States believes in civilian leadership of the military.  GOP officials have voiced concern that this is creating the false impression that the U.S. is distancing itself from the President.  In any public or private remarks, you will want to underscore our strong relationship with President Musharraf and his government, noting our appreciation for his contributions in the war on terror, his efforts to improve relations with India and the steps he has taken to advance democracy in Pakistan, such as freedom of the press and the appointment of an Independent Election Commissioner.  Afghanistan ----------- 10. (S) The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried that India is using its assets in Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan.  President Musharraf, his government and military leaders recognize Pakistan must support the Karzai government as it attempts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  That  ISLAMABAD 00007564  003 OF 004   said, the two leaders have difficulty restraining themselves from engaging in destructive public rhetoric in which each blames the other for not doing enough to effectively prosecute the battle against their common enemies in the tribal areas along the border.  India and Kashmir ----------------- 11. (S) President Musharraf and his senior advisors say that they have made a strategic decision to end the Kashmiri militancy; even Indian officials acknowledge the level of violence and cross-border infiltration has declined (though some New Delhi officials attribute this to Indian security measures).  President Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in New Delhi).  President Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on the final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that New Delhi is not afraid to discuss pragmatic solutions to make the LOC less-relevant in people's lives, but has also chided Pakistan for holding normalization of bilateral relations hostage to a final resolution of the Kashmir dispute.  Limited measures following the October earthquake to facilitate cross-LOC travel and communication have the potential to change the dynamic in Kashmir and may accelerate internal pressure on Islamabad and New Delhi to create additional space for interaction between Kashmiris in India and Pakistan.  13. (C) While there has been little progress on core issues relating to Kashmir, senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue process, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of five bus and two train routes between the two countries.  India and Pakistan have also, after 17 years, revived the Joint Commission to provide a forum for discussions on technical issues such as science and technology, information technology, telecommunications, and tourism.  The Pakistani Federal Investigation Agency and the India Central Bureau of Investigation recently initiated discussions aimed at promoting cross-border cooperation on human trafficking, currency counterfeiting, and illegal immigration.  14. (S) India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue.  Although senior Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive, many Pakistanis believe that the U.S. should lean on New Delhi to facilitate a settlement.  President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful resolution of the dispute on terms acceptable to Pakistan, India, and the people of Kashmir.  Global War on Terrorism ----------------------- 15. (S) Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the global war on terror, including its efforts to deny al Qa'ida and other extremist elements safe haven in Pakistan's untamed tribal areas along the Afghan border. Following the GOP's decision to extend central government control into the FATA (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  Since December 2005, the security situation in Waziristan has deteriorated, forcing the GOP to rethink its strategy. President Musharraf has articulated a three-pronged approach comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  The Pakistan military has suffered over 1,000 casualties in the FATA, with particularly heavy  ISLAMABAD 00007564  004 OF 004   fighting during the first week of March, when militants occupied a key town in North Waziristan.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the FATA and to provide training and rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  16. (C) In the aftermath of the July 7 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on terrorist/extremist organizations in Pakistan to much public fanfare.  We are still assessing whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run.  Initial law enforcement actions targeted the usual suspects--conservative clerics and Islamist politicians--prompting a strong popular backlash, with conservatives decrying the focus on Islamists.  Ultimately, the government released most detainees and watered down regulations intended to provide transparency on madrassa operations.  We have repeatedly pressed senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of key terrorist and extremist groups, including those involved in earthquake relief efforts in northern Pakistan.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against madrassas that support, recruit for, or shelter these organizations.  Balochistan ----------- 17. (S) Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling a negotiated settlement, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity that must be suppressed. At the moment, the pendulum appears ready to swing toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the FATA and in the war on terror.  Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan, and in managing periodic domestic civil unrest such as the cartoon controversy and sectarian tension.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/1/2006 11:45", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 007629  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A OSD - PLEASE PASS TO CARA NEGRETTE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2016 TAGS: MASS, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: POLITICAL AND SECURITY ASSISTANCE SCENESETTER FOR DEFENSE CONSULTATIVE GROUP MEETINGS  ISLAMABAD 00007629  001.2 OF 005   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U) In anticipation of the U.S.-Pakistan Defense Consultative Group (DCG) meetings in Washingont May 1-5, Embassy Islamabad offers the following snapshots of political and security assistance developments in Pakistan.  U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership ----------------------------------- 2. (S) During his March visit to Pakistan, President Bush launched a U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership.  This initiative has been institutionalized in the framework of a Strategic Dialogue that incorporates discussions on: economic growth and prosperity, energy cooperation, peace and security, social sector development, science and technology, democracy, and non-proliferation.  In the wake of President Bush's visit, and with the prospect of a U.S.-India civil nuclear deal, Pakistan's political class has been wracked by a bout of insecurity and \"me-tooism.\" Even President Musharraf has complained privately that there is now a public perception that the U.S. is distancing itself from him.  The inaugural meeting of the Strategic Dialogue, which were held in Washington from April 26-27, should help reassure Pakistan of the breadth and depth of our long-term commitment.  The Cartoon Controversy ----------------------- 3. (C) In February and early March, tens of thousands of Pakistani demonstrators took to the streets to protest the publication of the Danish cartoons.  Early rallies in Lahore and Peshawar were particularly destructive, with rampant looting and vandalism in parts of downtown Lahore and Peshawar and six protesters killed.  Although demonstrations followed across Pakistan, enhanced security measures by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) prevented any repetition of the unrestrained violence seen in February.  Over time, the protests took on a greater political tone, as opportunistic politicians sought to embarrass the Musharraf government. The protests have died out but it took Federal government intervention to quell them.  The DCG discussions present an opportunity to remind the Pakistani people that the United States understands the sentiments of the Muslim community and that, although we strongly support freedom of expression, we also believe the press should behave responsibly.  Earthquake Relief ----------------- 4. (U) The October 8 earthquake (7.6 on the Richter scale) in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was the strongest to hit the region in over a century.  The GOP estimates that more than 73,000 died in the quake, with more than 69,000 wounded and some 2.8 million left homeless.  The United States had been Pakistan's most visible international partner in delivering emergency relief during the sixth month effort.  5. (U) The U.S. military, which had been on the ground since October 10, concluded its relief operations on March 31.  At the peak of initial relief efforts, more than 1,200 personnel and 24 helicopters provided vital transport, logistics, and medical and engineering support in affected areas.  As we wrapped up our military relief operations, we donated more than USD 2.5 million in medical equipment to Pakistani counterparts.  Our Seabee unit also left behind 25 pieces of heavy construction equipment as a donation to Pakistani military engineers.  6. (U) The U.S. military and USAID collaborated closely on the civilian relief effort, with the military providing logistics and USAID working with NGOs to deliver supplies and services to camps and villages.  USAID provided more than USD 60 million in additional humanitarian assistance through NGOs and the United Nations, including the donation of blankets, tents, plastic sheeting and shelter kits to the affected population.  In March, USAID made its first reconstruction grant of USD 15 million to rebuild schools and hospitals.  In total, the USG has pledged USD 510 million for earthquake relief and reconstruction efforts.  The U.S. private sector is also engaged.  A consortium of CEOs (GE, Pfizer, Citigroup, Xerox and UPS) is spearheading the South Asia Earthquake Relief Fund, which has already attracted approximately USD 24 million.  Independent estimates place  ISLAMABAD 00007629  002.3 OF 005   total U.S. private donations at over USD 130 million.  7. (C) Our prompt and generous response sparked a perceptible shift in Pakistani attitudes about the United States that has improved bilateral relations at official levels.  The cooperation between U.S. and Pakistani military personnel has palpably reduced suspicions at the middle and upper ranks of the Pakistani army.  Throughout the draw-down of our military presence, we emphasized that our transition parallels the shift from emergency relief toward the civilian reconstruction phase of the recovery effort.  The Pakistanis, who have long been convinced that we are fair-weather friends, are beginning to understand that we are committed to a long-term relationship.  Democratization --------------- 8. (C) President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007. The government must address significant organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, but it has taken an important initial step with the March appointment of a permanent, independent election commissioner acceptable to all mainstream parties.  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  9. (C) Press commentary following A/S Boucher's April 4-6 visit to Pakistan gave considerable attention to his public remarks, including his observation that the United States believes in civilian leadership of the military.  GOP officials have voiced concern that this is creating the false impression that the U.S. is distancing itself from teh President.  In any public or private remarks, DCG participants will want to underscore our strong relationship with President Musharraf and his goverment, noting our appreciation for his contributions in the war on terror, his efforts to improve relations with India and the steps he has taken to advance democracy in Pakistan, such as freedom of the press and the appointment of an Independent Election Commissioner.  Afghanistan ----------- 10. (S) The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried that India is using its assets in Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan.  President Musharraf, his government and military leaders recognize Pakistan must support the Karzai government as it attempts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  That said, the two leaders have difficulty restraining themselves from engaging in destructive public rhetoric in which each blames the other for not doing enough to effectively prosecute the battle against their common enemies in the tribal areas along the border.  India and Kashmir ----------------- 11. (S) President Musharraf and his senior advisors say that they have made a strategic decision to end the Kashmiri militancy; even Indian officials acknowledge the level of violence and cross-border infiltration has declined (though some New Delhi officials attribute this to Indian security measures).  President Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in New Delhi).  President Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on the final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that New Delhi is not afraid to discuss pragmatic solutions to make the LOC less-relevant in people's lives, but has also chided Pakistan for holding normalization of  ISLAMABAD 00007629  003.2 OF 005   bilateral relations hostage to a final resolution of the Kashmir dispute.  Limited measures following the October earthquake to facilitate cross-LOC travel and communication have the potential to change the dynamic in Kashmir and may accelerate internal pressure on Islamabad and New Delhi to create additional space for interaction between Kashmiris in India and Pakistan.  12. (C) While there has been little progress on core issues relating to Kashmir, senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue process, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of five bus and two train routes between the two countries.  India and Pakistan have also, after 17 years, revived the Joint Commission to provide a forum for discussions on technical issues such as science and technology, information technology, telecommunications, and tourism.  The Pakistani Federal Investigation Agency and the Indian Central Bureau of Investigation recently initiated discussions aimed at promoting cross-border cooperation on human trafficking, currency counterfeiting, and illegal immigration.  13. (S) India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue.  Senior Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive, and President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's statement calling for a peaceful resolution of the dispute on terms acceptable to Pakistan, India, and the people of Kashmir.  As many Pakistani civilian and military officials share the public's perception that the U.S. should lean on New Delhi to facilitate a settlement, DCG participants should be prepared to respond to calls for greater USG involvement by citing President Bush's even-handed remarks.  Global War on Terrorism ----------------------- 14. (S) Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the global war on terror, including its efforts to deny al Qa'ida and other extremist elements safe haven in Pakistan's untamed tribal areas along the Afghan border. Following the GOP's decision to extend central government control into the FATA (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  Since December 2005, the security situation in Waziristan has deteriorated, forcing the GOP to rethink its strategy. President Musharraf has articulated a three-pronged approach comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  The Pakistan military has suffered over 1,000 casualties in the FATA, with particularly heavy fighting during the first week of March, when militants occupied a key town in North Waziristan.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the FATA and to provide training and rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  15. (C) In the aftermath of the July 7 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on terrorist/extremist organizations in Pakistan to much public fanfare.  We are still assessing whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run.  Initial law enforcement actions targeted the usual suspects--conservative clerics and Islamist politicians--prompting a strong popular backlash, with conservatives decrying the focus on Islamists.  Ultimately, the government released most detainees and watered down regulations intended to provide transparency on madrassa operations.  We have repeatedly pressed senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of key terrorist and extremist groups, including those involved in earthquake relief efforts in northern Pakistan.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against madrassas that support, recruit for, or shelter these organizations.  Balochistan ----------- 16. (S) Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances  ISLAMABAD 00007629  004.2 OF 005   against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling a negotiated settlement, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity that must be suppressed. At the moment, the pendulum appears ready to swing toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the FATA and in the war on terror.  Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan, and in managing periodic domestic civil unrest such as the cartoon controversy and sectarian tension.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  Pakistan Air Force Command Change --------------------------------- 17. (U) Recently, the Pakistan Air Force has undergone a leadership change with the appointment of Chief Air Marshal Tanvir to the Chief of the Air Staff position and Air Marshal Shahid to the directors Chief of the Air Staff or Operations position.  Security Assistance:  F-16s, C-130s and Joint Exercises --------------------------------------------- ----------  18.  (C) The Pakistan Air Force (PAF) is obsessed with F-16s.  The Ministry of Defense for Production (MODP) submitted restated Letters of Requests for new F-16s (18 with an option for an additional 18 aircraft), Mid-Life Upgrade of Pakistan's existing fleet of 34 F-16 aircraft, 26 Used Block 15 F-16s (preferably Peace Gate III/IV aircraft), and a weapons package.  The requested configuration of the new F-16's is: JDAM, AMRAAM, LINK-16, and APG-68(V) 9 radar.  The new-buy program, MLU, and weapons packages are fairly well understood; for the used aircraft LOR, however, there is no DOD position on the availability of used Block 15 F-16s (especially former Peace Gate aircraft) for EDA transfers.  The request for used F-16 represents the GOP's desire to acquire aircraft at an extreme discount.  The GOP remains fixated on the 26 aircraft produced under the Peace Gate III/IV programs, but not delivered to Pakistan due to sanctions (even though a formal settlement was reached with the GOP).  These 26 aircraft are currently in the Air Force (test and evaluation) and Navy (aggressor aircraft) active duty fleet and any transfer would require replacements to fill assigned missions.  19.  (C) The Pakistan Air Force recently concluded a financing deal completing the Swedish Erie-Eye Airborne Early Warning (AEW) aircraft.  While the PAF submitted requests for U.S. AEW platforms, the requests never focused on releasable weapon systems (Wedgetail) or focused on AEW systems the PAF previously rejected (E2C).  The Pakistan Navy is procuring P-3B AEW aircraft.  20. (C)  The C-130 program, worth USD 75 million, will deliver 6 refurbished C-130 aircraft to the GOP, ultimately increasing Pakistan's C-130 fleet to 11 aircraft. Both Air Chief Marshal Tanvir and Air Marshal Shahid are satisfied with the direct engagement of senior USG officials with Lockheed Martin corporate officals regarding the continued failure to meet interim and delivery milestones.  Recently, Lockheed Martin met with SAF/IA to explain how it will deliver the remaining four aircraft by the end of December 2006.  As background, Prime Minister Aziz expressed concerns about the program to the Secretary of Defense in December, which were underscored by the former Chief of the Pakistan Air Force, Chief Air Marshal Sadat, at the Singapore Air Show. The program is approximately one year behind schedule.  Until recently, Lockheed Martin failed to commit sufficient resources to meet restated delivery commitments.  While Lockheed Martin is hitting interim milestones, both the PAF and the USG and are taking a wait-and-see attitude.  The second C-130 was delivered to the Government of Pakistan mid-April 2006.  21. (SBU) Joint Exercise Falcon Talon was considered a huge success by the Pakistan Air Force.  This represented the  ISLAMABAD 00007629  005.3 OF 005   first USAF and PAF exercise held in Pakistan.  The exercise consisted of 6 USAF F-16 aircraft and 8 F-16, 16 Mirage, and 6 F-7 aircraft.  The Pakistan Air Force has a significant military to military engagement program.  The Pakistan Air Staff was extremely pleased with the recent Combat Search and Rescue and F-16 engagements and is looking forward to the upcoming Flight Safety, Tactical Airspace Management/Air Traffic Control, Electronic Intelligence, and T-37 engagements.   BODDE BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE58668", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/2/2006 11:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 007770  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/30/2016 TAGS: PREL, MARR, PK, SA SUBJECT: PRINCE SULTAN'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN: MOSTLY OPTICS; MAYBE DEFENSE SALES  REF: STATE 58668  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.   1.  (C)  Summary.  In the week following Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud's April visit to Pakistan, PolCouns sought assessments in separate meetings with the MFA Director General for the Gulf region Sajjad Haider, Saudi Embassy DCM Abdullah Al-Omari and a respected local journalist, Farhan Bokhari (strictly protect).   While MFA and Saudi Embassy officials sought to play down the significance of the visit, the journalist, citing an inside source, said that in fact there had been substantive discussions of security issues, including a possible sale to the Saudis of 150 Al Khalid battle tanks and 12-15 K-8 trainer aircraft. This was Prince Sultan's first visit to Pakistan since becoming Crown Prince, and it came as the last leg of a three-nation tour that included Japan and Singapore.  The stop-over followed an official visit by Saudi King Abdullah in February -- an inaugural tour abroad as Saudi King that took him to China, India, Malaysia and Pakistan.  End Summary  2  (C) Haider characterized the trip as a routine stopover, with no agreements signed and no significant policy developments.  It was \"mostly symbolic\" he said.   Unlike King Abdullah's visit, this had not been an extravaganza. Following Sultan's arrival, President Musharraf had met with him for a one-on-one, then hosted him for dinner and for an evening of entertainment.  The following day, Prime Minister Aziz hosted him for lunch, and Sultan flew out that afternoon. The Saudi delegation had not included the Saudi Foreign Minister nor any noteworthy officials, other than the Prince himself (who also served as Saudi Defense Minister). \"It was all princes, but minor princes,\" Haider explained. Though he was not privy to what had transpired in the meeting with Musharraf, Haider said that in other meetings the sides had discussed extremism, Pakistan-India relations, terrorism, economic relations, prospects for Saudi investment and issues relating to the 1.1 million Pakistani workers in Saudi Arabia.  3.  (C) Al-Omari echoed Haider's assessment, downplaying the significance of the visit and saying that the stopover had been an afterthought.  Originally, the Prince had planned to visit Japan and Singapore only, but the stopover had been tacked on to address Pakistani dismay following King Abdullah's much-heralded visit to India in late January. Sultan sought to reassure the Pakistanis that Saudi relations with India would not interfere with its long-standing friendship with Pakistan.  (At the same time, Al-Omari explained, the Saudis maintain very good relations with India, which was a major market for Saudi oil.)  As for the meetings themselves, the Pakistanis were looking to promote trade and investment and wanted to explore whether earthquake survivors could be offered employment opportunities in the Saudi Arabia. Defense issues had not been discussed, and no joint statement had been released.  4. (C)  Bokhari, who writes for the Financial Times, reported that he had been told by a source privy to the Musharraf-Sultan meeting that, in fact, defense issues had been discussed at some length.  He observed that this was to be expected, as Sultan was Saudi Defense Minister.  He claimed that Musharraf was pursuing the sale of 150 Pakistani-made Al Khalid main battle tanks to the Saudis for $600 million.   According to Bokhari, approximately half this amount would amount to a Saudi subsidy for the Pakistani defense industry -- an industry in which the Saudis had, he posited, a strategic interest.  Secondly, Musharraf had hoped to offer training in special operations to the Saudis, and perhaps to provide actual Special Operations Task Force units that could be deployed at sensitive oil installations or in Dhamam province.  Third, the Pakistanis had hoped to sell the Saudis a dozen or more K-8 trainer aircraft.  Bokhari believed that the two sides had reached an agreement on the Al Khalid tanks, but not on the other two items.  While military sales had been the focus, according to Bokhari, economic issues had also been discussed, as the Pakistanis were eager for Saudi investment on the Balochistan coast.   Comment -------  ISLAMABAD 00007770  002 OF 002    5. (C) The Pakistanis have been pushing the Al-Khalid and K-8 sales for a while, hoping they might break the ice for sales to cost-conscious buyers in the developing world. We are aware that the Pakistanis also took Prince Sultan's delegation to visit production facilities, which suggests that they are still at the marketing stage and haven't yet finalized a deal.  The Saudis, of course, already have access to much better (U.S.) equipment, so any purchase from the Pakistanis would be a goodwill gesture and lend some credence to Bokhari's thesis that the Saudis have a strategic interest in sustaining the arms industry in a friendly and nearby Islamic state. Musharraf's reported offer of special forces training or personnel would be surprising; the performance of Pakistani special forces in Waziristan suggests that they are still on the steep end of the learning curve.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE50811", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/2/2006 11:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 007771  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/01/2016 TAGS: MNUC, PARM, PGOV, PHSA, PREL, KNNP, PK SUBJECT: PSI: DEMARCHE DELIVERED  REF: STATE 050811  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b.  1.  (U) See action request at para 5.  2.  (C) Polcouns delivered reftel demarche in a meeting with MFA Director General for Disarmament Qazi Khalilullah and Director for Disarmament Kamran Aktar, urging that Pakistan endorse PSI Interdiction Principles as a precursor to participation in the June Senior Level Political meeting on PSI hosted by Poland.  Khalilullah underscored that Pakistan shared the nonproliferation objectives but had questions about the Statement of Interdiction Principles, particularly as they related to interdiction on the high seas.  The principles were \"a bit vague\" he said, and \"did not appear consistent with the law of the sea.\"  He hoped for engagement with the U.S.  3.  (C) With respect to the June meeting in Poland, Khalilullah asked whether Pakistan could be invited as an observer.  Pakistanis had participated as observers in PSI exercises, including exercises in Singapore in August 2005 and Darwin, Australia in April 2006.  Polcouns explained that endorsement of the interdiction principles was a precondition of participation in the June meeting, noting that Pakistan's request to participate as an observer in the 2004 meeting in Krakow had been denied.  Polcouns observed that a request to participate as an observer would be interpreted in Washington as a refusal to endorse the Interdiction Principles. Khalilullah undertook to reexamine Pakistan's stance.  4.  (C) In a follow-up meeting on April 28 with Polcouns, Additional Secretary Tariq Osman Hyder confirmed that Pakistan was not yet prepared to endorse the PSI statement of interdiction principles, but hoped for an opportunity to participate as an observer in the June meeting.  He noted that Pakistan was \"in line with PSI\" goals, and was prepared to act within Pakistan's own \"maritime area.\"  With respect to interdiction on the high seas, Pakistan was prepared to engage and discuss the issue.  5.  (C) Embassy requests Department guidance on whether Pakistan could participate as an observer in the June meeting.  Embassy also stands ready to pass to the Pakistanis any guidance Department might provide that would clarify PSI obligations relating to interdiction on the high seas and the consonance of these obligations with the law of the sea.                         BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/2/2006 12:20", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 007780  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  CENTCOM - PLEASE PASS TO CENTAF COMMANDER LTG NORTH KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2016 TAGS: MASS, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR U.S. CENTRAL AIR FORCES COMMANDER LTG GARY L. NORTH'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W.Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S) The U.S. Mission in Pakistan warmly welcomes your May visit to Pakistan.  As demonstrated during President Bush's visit to Islamabad, both President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward Musharraf's goal of \"enlightened moderation.\" They viewed the President's visit as a landmark in the relationship and were gratified that he decided to stay overnight in Pakistan.  Your visit comes as Pakistan's leaders have weathered the fallout from the Danish cartoon controversy, but continue to be challenged by violent separatists in Balochistan, al-Qa'ida and extremists in the tribal areas along the Afghan border, and the transition from earthquake relief operations to long-term reconstruction. Robust USG participation in the earthquake relief effort has promoted a more positive public perception of the United States, but Pakistan remains a tough public diplomacy environment.  We believe that your visit will help advance key U.S. objectives, including democratization, regional stability, and progress in the global war on terror.  U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership ----------------------------------- 2. (S) During his March visit to Pakistan, President Bush launched a U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership.  This initiative has been institutionalized in the framework of a Strategic Dialogue that incorporates discussions on: economic growth and prosperity, energy cooperation, peace and security, social sector development, science and technology, democracy, and non-proliferation.  In the wake of President Bush's visit, and with the prospect of a U.S.-India civil nuclear deal, Pakistan's political class has been wracked by a bout of insecurity and \"me-tooism.\" Even President Musharraf has complained privately that there is now a public perception that the U.S. is distancing itself from him.  The inaugural meeting of the Strategic Dialogue, which were held in Washington from April 26-27, should help reassure Pakistan of the breadth and depth of our long-term commitment.  The Cartoon Controversy ----------------------- 3. (C) In February and early March, tens of thousands of Pakistani demonstrators took to the streets to protest the publication of the Danish cartoons.  Early rallies in Lahore and Peshawar were particularly destructive, with rampant looting and vandalism in parts of downtown Lahore and Peshawar and six protesters killed.  Although demonstrations followed across Pakistan, enhanced security measures by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) prevented any repetition of the unrestrained violence seen in February.  Over time, the protests took on a greater political tone, as opportunistic politicians sought to embarrass the Musharraf government. The protests have died out following Federal government intervention to quell them.  Your visit presents an opportunity to remind the Pakistani people that the United States understands the sentiments of the Muslim community and that, although we strongly support freedom of expression, we also believe the press should behave responsibly.  Earthquake Relief ----------------- 4. (U) The October 8 earthquake (7.6 on the Richter scale) in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was the strongest to hit the region in over a century.  The GOP estimates that more than 73,000 died in the quake, with more than 69,000 wounded and some 2.8 million left homeless.  The United States had been Pakistan's most visible international partner in delivering emergency relief during the sixth month effort.  5. (U) The U.S. military, which had been on the ground since October 10, concluded its relief operations on March 31.  At the peak of initial relief efforts, more than 1,200 personnel and 24 helicopters provided vital transport, logistics, and medical and engineering support in affected areas.  As we wrapped up our military relief operations, we donated more than USD 2.5 million in medical equipment to Pakistani counterparts.  Our Seabee unit also left behind 25 pieces of heavy construction equipment as a donation to Pakistani military engineers.  ISLAMABAD 00007780  002 OF 005    6. (U) The U.S. military and USAID collaborated closely on the civilian relief effort, with the military providing logistics and USAID working with NGOs to deliver supplies and services to camps and villages.  USAID provided more than USD 60 million in additional humanitarian assistance through NGOs and the United Nations, including the donation of blankets, tents, plastic sheeting and shelter kits to the affected population.  In March, USAID made its first reconstruction grant of USD 15 million to rebuild schools and hospitals.  In total, the USG has pledged USD 510 million for earthquake relief and reconstruction efforts.  The U.S. private sector is also engaged.  A consortium of CEOs (GE, Pfizer, Citigroup, Xerox and UPS) is spearheading the South Asia Earthquake Relief Fund, which has already attracted approximately USD 24 million.  Independent estimates place total U.S. private donations at over USD 130 million.  7. (C) Our prompt and generous response sparked a perceptible shift in Pakistani attitudes about the United States that has improved bilateral relations at official levels.  The cooperation between U.S. and Pakistani military personnel has palpably reduced suspicions at the middle and upper ranks of the Pakistani army.  Throughout the draw-down of our military presence, we emphasized that our transition parallels the shift from emergency relief toward the civilian reconstruction phase of the recovery effort.  The Pakistanis, who have long been convinced that we are fair-weather friends, are beginning to understand that we are committed to a long-term relationship.  Democratization --------------- 8. (C) President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007. The government must address significant organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, but it has taken an important initial step with the March appointment of a permanent, independent election commissioner acceptable to all mainstream parties.  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the legislatures, the political parties and local government institutions.  9. (C) Press commentary following A/S Boucher's April 4-6 visit to Pakistan gave considerable attention to his public remarks, including his observation that the United States believes in civilian leadership of the military.  GOP officials have voiced concern that this is creating the false impression that the U.S. is distancing itself from the President.  In any public or private remarks, you will want to underscore our strong relationship with President Musharraf and his goverment, noting our appreciation for his contributions in the war on terror, his efforts to improve relations with India and the steps he has taken to advance democracy in Pakistan, such as freedom of the press and the appointment of an Independent Election Commissioner.  Afghanistan ----------- 10. (S) The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried that India is using its assets in Afghanistan to destabilize Balochistan.  President Musharraf, his government and military leaders recognize Pakistan must support the Karzai government as it attempts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  That said, the two leaders have difficulty restraining themselves from engaging in destructive public rhetoric in which each blames the other for not doing enough to effectively prosecute the battle against their common enemies in the tribal areas along the border.  India and Kashmir ----------------- 11. (S) President Musharraf and his senior advisors say that they have made a strategic decision to end the Kashmiri  ISLAMABAD 00007780  003 OF 005   militancy; even Indian officials acknowledge the level of violence and cross-border infiltration has declined (though some New Delhi officials attribute this to Indian security measures).  President Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in New Delhi).  President Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on the final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that New Delhi is not afraid to discuss pragmatic solutions to make the LOC less-relevant in people's lives, but has also chided Pakistan for holding normalization of bilateral relations hostage to a final resolution of the Kashmir dispute.  Limited measures following the October earthquake to facilitate cross-LOC travel and communication have the potential to change the dynamic in Kashmir and may accelerate internal pressure on Islamabad and New Delhi to create additional space for interaction between Kashmiris in India and Pakistan.  12. (C) While there has been little progress on core issues relating to Kashmir, senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue process, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of five bus and two train routes between the two countries.  India and Pakistan have also, after 17 years, revived the Joint Commission to provide a forum for discussions on technical issues such as science and technology, information technology, telecommunications, and tourism.  The Pakistani Federal Investigation Agency and the Indian Central Bureau of Investigation recently initiated discussions aimed at promoting cross-border cooperation on human trafficking, currency counterfeiting, and illegal immigration.  13. (S) India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue.  Senior Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive, and President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's statement calling for a peaceful resolution of the dispute on terms acceptable to Pakistan, India, and the people of Kashmir.  As many Pakistani civilian and military officials share the public's perception that the U.S. should lean on New Delhi to facilitate a settlement, U.S. officials should be prepared to respond to calls for greater USG involvement by citing President Bush's even-handed remarks.  Global War on Terrorism ----------------------- 14. (S) Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the global war on terror, including its efforts to deny al Qa'ida and other extremist elements safe haven in Pakistan's untamed tribal areas along the Afghan border. Following the GOP's decision to extend central government control into the FATA (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  Since December 2005, the security situation in Waziristan has deteriorated, forcing the GOP to rethink its strategy. President Musharraf has articulated a three-pronged approach comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  The Pakistan military has suffered over 1,000 casualties in the FATA, with particularly heavy fighting during the first week of March, when militants occupied a key town in North Waziristan.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the FATA and to provide training and rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  15. (C) In the aftermath of the July 7 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on terrorist/extremist organizations in Pakistan to much public fanfare.  We are still assessing whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run.  Initial law enforcement actions targeted the usual  ISLAMABAD 00007780  004 OF 005   suspects--conservative clerics and Islamist politicians--prompting a strong popular backlash, with conservatives decrying the focus on Islamists.  Ultimately, the government released most detainees and watered down regulations intended to provide transparency on madrassa operations.  We have repeatedly pressed senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of key terrorist and extremist groups, including those involved in earthquake relief efforts in northern Pakistan.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against madrassas that support, recruit for, or shelter these organizations.  Balochistan ----------- 16. (S) Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling a negotiated settlement, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity that must be suppressed. At the moment, the pendulum appears ready to swing toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the FATA and in the war on terror.  Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan, and in managing periodic domestic civil unrest such as the cartoon controversy and sectarian tension.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  Pakistan Air Force Command Change --------------------------------- 17. (U) Recently, the Pakistan Air Force has undergone a leadership change with the appointment of Chief Air Marshal Tanvir to the Chief of the Air Staff position and Air Marshal Shahid to the directors Chief of the Air Staff or Operations position.  Security Assistance:  F-16s, C-130s and Joint Exercises --------------------------------------------- ----------  18.  (C) The Pakistan Air Force (PAF) is obsessed with F-16s.  The Ministry of Defense for Production (MODP) submitted restated Letters of Requests for new F-16s (18 with an option for an additional 18 aircraft), Mid-Life Upgrade of Pakistan's existing fleet of 34 F-16 aircraft, 26 Used Block 15 F-16s (preferably Peace Gate III/IV aircraft), and a weapons package.  The requested configuration of the new F-16's is: JDAM, AMRAAM, LINK-16, and APG-68(V) 9 radar.  The new-buy program, MLU, and weapons packages are fairly well understood; for the used aircraft LOR, however, there is no DOD position on the availability of used Block 15 F-16s (especially former Peace Gate aircraft) for EDA transfers.  The request for used F-16 represents the GOP's desire to acquire aircraft at an extreme discount.  The GOP remains fixated on the 26 aircraft produced under the Peace Gate III/IV programs, but not delivered to Pakistan due to sanctions (even though a formal settlement was reached with the GOP).  These 26 aircraft are currently in the Air Force (test and evaluation) and Navy (aggressor aircraft) active duty fleet and any transfer would require replacements to fill assigned missions.  19.  (C) The Pakistan Air Force recently concluded a financing deal completing the Swedish Erie-Eye Airborne Early Warning (AEW) aircraft.  While the PAF submitted requests for U.S. AEW platforms, the requests never focused on releasable weapon systems (Wedgetail) or focused on AEW systems the PAF previously rejected (E2C).  The Pakistan Navy is procuring P-3B AEW aircraft.  20. (C)  The C-130 program, worth USD 75 million, will deliver 6 refurbished C-130 aircraft to the GOP, ultimately increasing Pakistan's C-130 fleet to 11 aircraft. Both Air Chief Marshal Tanvir and Air Marshal Shahid are satisfied with the direct engagement of senior USG officials with Lockheed Martin corporate  ISLAMABAD 00007780  005 OF 005   officals regarding the continued failure to meet interim and delivery milestones.  Recently, Lockheed Martin met with SAF/IA to explain how it will deliver the remaining four aircraft by the end of December 2006.  As background, Prime Minister Aziz expressed concerns about the program to the Secretary of Defense in December, which were underscored by the former Chief of the Pakistan Air Force, Chief Air Marshal Sadat, at the Singapore Air Show. The program is approximately one year behind schedule.  Until recently, Lockheed Martin failed to commit sufficient resources to meet restated delivery commitments.  While Lockheed Martin is hitting interim milestones, both the PAF and the USG and are taking a wait-and-see attitude.  The second C-130 was delivered to the Government of Pakistan mid-April 2006.  21. (SBU) Joint Exercise Falcon Talon was considered a huge success by the Pakistan Air Force.  This represented the first USAF and PAF exercise held in Pakistan.  The exercise consisted of 6 USAF F-16 aircraft and 8 F-16, 16 Mirage, and 6 F-7 aircraft.  The Pakistan Air Force has a significant military to military engagement program.  The Pakistan Air Staff was extremely pleased with the recent Combat Search and Rescue and F-16 engagements and is looking forward to the upcoming Flight Safety, Tactical Airspace Management/Air Traffic Control, Electronic Intelligence, and T-37 engagements.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE63765", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/2/2006 13:57", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 007822  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, ETTC, KSTC, PARM SUBJECT: GOP RESPONSE TO EXBS PROPOSAL  REF: STATE 63765  1. (U) This message contains an action request; please see para. 3.  2.  (SBU)  On April 28, POLCOUNS presented MFA Additional Secretary (UN & Disarmament) Tariq Usman Haider a proposed  SIPDIS schedule of EXBS training courses and seminars (reftel). While affirming that the GOP is interested, in principal, in participating in all proposed USG programs, Haider noted that Pakistan's does not have a deep bench when it comes to EXBS specialists; capacity issues will continue to be a challenge as the MFA works to identify appropriate candidates for the proposed USG events.  3. (SBU)  Action request:  Post will continue to work with the MFA Disarmament Cell to facilitate GOP participation in USG-sponsored EXBS training and requests additional information soonest on events proposed reftel for the May - July 2006 time frame.  Factoring in Haider's remarks regarding GOP capacity, post requests that ISN/ECC specify how many participants it is seeking for each proposed event, as well as the background or professional qualifications it seeks in Pakistani candidates.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE66050", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/2/2006 13:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 007823  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/02/2016 TAGS: KUNR, PHUM, PK, PREL, UNHRC-1 SUBJECT: GOP SUPPORTS PAKISTANI, NOT IRANIAN, HRC CANDIDATE  REF: A. STATE 66050       B. STAE 68575      C. UN 827  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On April 28, POLCOUNS delivered ref A points regarding Iran's candidacy for the Human Rights Council (HRC) to MFA Additional Secretary (UN) Tariq Usman Haider.  Rather than oppose Iran's candidacy for the HRC seat directly, Haider replied that GOP will campaign for the Pakistani candidate who is also seeking election to the HRC (ref C).  Haider explained that there are 16 candidates for the 13 seats representing Asia, and hinted dryly that a pledge of U.S. support for the Pakistani candidate might advance the U.S. objective by excluding the Iranian candidate. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE62850", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/3/2006 10:44", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 007884  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/02/2016 TAGS: PARM, PK, PREL, CWC SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  USG REQUEST TO EXTEND CWC DESTRUCTION DEADLINE  REF: STATE 62850  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On April 28, 2005, POLCOUNS delivered reftel talking points regarding the U.S. request to extend the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) deadline for destruction of CW stockpiles to MFA Additional Secretary (UN and Disarmament) Tariq Usman Haider.  Haider took the points under advisement, saying only that the GOP would give the extension request full consideration. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD5364", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/5/2006 8:40", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 008148  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS USAID  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, EAID, OIIP, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: A STRATEGY FOR FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS IN PAKISTAN  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 5364       B. (B) ISLAMABAD 4595      C. ISLAMABAD 4347  ISLAMABAD 00008148  001.2 OF 005   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d.  1. (C)  Summary:  With the appointment of a credible, permanent Chief Election Commissioner (CEC), Pakistan is moving in the necessary direction for free and fair elections in 2007.  Post believes that the credibility of the 2007 contest has significant implications for long-term stability and democratization.  A free and fair contest will set the stage to begin significant long-term investment in the strengthening of democratic institutions and the exit of the military from elected politics.  Rigged elections will only serve to increase public ire at the current government, weaken its ability to pursue necessary policies, and undermine the credibility of the USG commitment to democracy in the region.  For these reasons, post has elaborated a comprehensive assistance strategy matching technical assistance, diplomatic engagement, and public diplomacy programming directly to what we view as key election obstacles.  Post appreciates Washington agencies' careful review of this strategy, provision of the identified programmatic resources, and engagement with key non-governmental agencies and other international donors. End Summary.  2. (C) The upcoming national elections are a critical benchmark in Pakistan's democratic development.  They will mark the final transition back to full civilian rule following the 1999 coup and will lay the groundwork for the country's future political evolution.  Opposition parties, civil society, and the central government are all placing significant emphasis on the need for these elections to be free and fair -- a marked departure from Pakistan's history of controlled democracy.  Achieving elections that major parties accept as a genuine representation of the will of the Pakistani people will provide the new, likely progressive, government with a heretofore absent public mandate.  This will enable it to tackle forthrightly the domestic and international challenges facing Pakistan, consolidate democratic institutions, and make progress towards civilian control over the military.  Rigged elections will increase opposition to the Musharraf government, fuel public unrest and provincial insurgencies, and weaken the GOP's ability to undertake controversial policies.  In a worst case scenario, united opposition protests over elections could topple the GOP, leading to a coalition arrangement in which Islamist parties would have greatly increased influence.  While post believes that the GOP is committed to organizing a reasonably free and fair contest, international technical assistance, election monitoring, and continuous diplomatic engagement will be essential to overcome long-standing obstacles and ensure public confidence in the process.  Electoral Set-Up  3. (C) The Election Commission of Pakistan's (ECP) credibility may be at an all-time low.  Its last three  ISLAMABAD 00008148  002.2 OF 005   attempts to organize national elections (2002 referendum, 2002 national elections, 2005 local elections) were failures.  The recent appointment of a permanent CEC is a necessary but not a sufficient step to restore credibility.  Pakistani law does not provide sufficient independence or authority to the ECP to carry out its mandate, and there is no tradition of regular consultation between the ECP and political parties. A number of outstanding issues need to be addressed relating to the overall electoral set-up such as whether or not a caretaker government will be appointed, the return of opposition party leaders, and delimitation of electoral districts.  Regularized engagement between the CEC and the heads of all major political parties would create the necessary framework.  To that end, post is proposing assistance for the formation of a consultative forum to which we would provide international expertise.  The initial focus would be on revision of electoral laws and regulations to empower the ECP and address outstanding structural issues. The forum would then focus on development of a universally acceptable Electoral Code of Conduct and resolution of disputes during the nomination, campaign, and election process.  4. (C) Technical considerations also hamper the ECP's effectiveness.  The ECP requires fully-staffed provincial and district offices that are empowered to pursue aggressively suspected election violations and adjudicate such violations in a timely and impartial manner.  The previous reliance on judicial personnel is insufficient and creates a conflict of interest as the judiciary is expected to rule on its own personnel's decisions during election appeals.  Adequate training of polling staff has also been a critical problem. Early identification and in-depth training on simplified electoral procedures needs to occur.  Coupled with this, enhanced voter training, appropriate for a largely illiterate population, is required.  Donor support will be necessary to address these concerns and leverage GOP resources.  Public Confidence  5. (C) Rebuilding shattered public credibility will be key to ensuring significant voter participation. Consistent allegations of rigging have led to a perception that government personnel occasionally stuff ballot boxes or otherwise change electoral results.  This is in addition to the more frequent allegations of pre-poll rigging, voter intimidation, and other forms of coercive support. Monitoring by local NGOs coupled with selective observation by international donors and NGOs has not ended these practices.  Transparent ballot boxes and appropriate voting screens, as used in Afghanistan, would increase the difficulty in carrying out fraud and would help increase voter confidence.  We also believe that a significant investment in nationwide international observation from nomination through appeal of results coupled with a parallel vote count in each district is essential to address these questions.  To avoid competing programs and assessments, post strongly recommends a single joint observation mission in coordination with other donors.   ISLAMABAD 00008148  003.2 OF 005   Voter Lists  6. (C) Pakistan's voter lists are in a state of complete disarray.  Initial lists prepared in 2000 for the local bodies elections remain highly controversial with opposition parties charging that their supporters were deliberately omitted.  The 2002 amendments to those lists are even more controversial such that they were not even utilized in the 2005 local bodies contests.  The CEC in his initial meeting with the Ambassador made clear that entirely new lists were required.  For this to be an effective exercise, the ECP will require extensive assistance in how to carry out a credible non-partisan process.  Considerable training of registration personnel coupled with assistance in computerization of the new lists so that they can easily be updated is needed.  Intelligence/Security Agencies  7. (S)  The involvement of security agencies in elections has been pervasive.  Intelligence agencies have supported candidates and parties for elections and have engaged in candidate and voter intimidation.  Organized voting fraud supported by these agencies has changed results in certain districts.  Significant donor pressure during the 2005 local elections was generally effective in keeping intelligence agencies out of the electoral process.  A similar, unified intervention will be necessary for 2007.  With the withdrawal of intelligence agencies in 2005, provincial governments utilized police to carry out many of the same fraudulent activities.  Coordinated engagement with the national and provincial government on the police role in the electoral process will be important.  We also believe that direct training in election security for police at the district level can help to avert future misbehavior and, at the same time, decrease violence at the polls.  Political Parties  8. (C) Pakistan's political parties have no concept of issues-based campaigning.  Their electoral campaigns tend to revolve around personalities and mud-slinging.  Grass-roots involvement in the development of party platforms is non-existent and the selection of candidates is a highly-controversial, non-democratic exercise.  Post believes that continued work is crucial if we are to build a better electoral system.  The National Democratic Institute is currently working with the parties to develop younger leadership talent and to build democratic mechanisms. Its program will conclude in early 2007, and we do not/not believe that an extension is warranted given that parties will be exclusively focused on electioneering by that time. The International Republican Institute (IRI) is currently concluding a small pilot program on electoral polling and issues development funded by the National Endowment for Democracy (NED).  We believe that additional programming through 2007 is warranted.  FATA  9. (C) Conduct of national elections in the Federally  ISLAMABAD 00008148  004.2 OF 005   Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) will continue to mark a significant challenge for the GOP.  Aside from obvious security issues, the FATA has a very brief history of electoral politics, low voter turn-out rates particularly among women, and a bar on political party work (a bar routinely flouted by the Islamist parties that use the mullahs as their agents).  Engagement at the senior levels of the GOP will be critical to lift the bar on political party activity to allow elections to be contested in a manner equal to other areas of the country.  This will allow secular parties to compete, for the first time, on an equal footing with their Islamist rivals.  In addition, voter education work, particularly among women, will be vital to ensure a higher turn-out and a better informed electorate.  Existing Resources  10. (SBU)  USAID has identified $16 million in FY 06 DG funds for election-related activities.  A request for proposals has already gone out to IQC holders to utilize this existing funding for the following activities:      -- Revision of voter roles     -- Creation of a forum between political parties and the ECP to review election laws, regulations, and procedures,        draft a joint Electoral Code of Conduct; and serve as a dispute resolution forum during the election process.     -- Purchase transparent ballot boxes and voting screens for the ECP  On the political party front, USAID's $1.7 million program on strengthening political parties through the National Democratic Institute will continue through February 2007.  A portion of this program focuses on election-related issues. NED's $500,000 program through the International Republican Institute on polling and issues-based platform development will conclude in September 2006.  IIP has agreed to finance two additional Speaker's programs in FY 2006.  The first of these would organize public discussion on reforms to electoral laws and procedures.  The second would work with political parties on organization of campaigns and selection of candidates.  At this stage, no other donors have made definitive commitments on elections.  Local British, Canadian, and EU missions have indicated a willingness to fund some training of ECP staff, while Nordic countries, Switzerland, and Canada are interested in funding voter education.  Needed Funding  11. (SBU) Post believes that additional funding needs to be rapidly identified and made available for full implementation of our election support strategy.  Post requires an additional $13 million in FY 07 funding to support training of ECP staff, establishment of district offices, and post-election analysis and follow-up.  Only $3 million of that has been firmly identified by USAID.  In addition, as indicated reftels, post requires approximately $20 million for nationwide international monitoring and a parallel vote tabulation; $1 million for voter education in the FATA; and  ISLAMABAD 00008148  005.2 OF 005   $250,000 for training of district police officers in election security.  We had originally requested that such funds be made available through DRL.  We understand, however, that HRDF funds may not/not be sufficient.  For this reason, post requests that new resources from a combination of sources (USAID, HRDF, and ESF) be identified for these activities. Additional IIP support for election-related speakers will also be required in FY 2007 on such topics as media coverage of election campaigns.  We understand that IRI will be submitting an unsolicited proposal to USAID to continue work on polling and issues-based platform development with political parties.  Post strongly supports this initiative and recommends funding.  In addition to USG support, immediate engagement with like-minded donors to support voter education (Nordics, Benelux, Germany, and EU), a single, comprehensive international election monitoring mission (Canada, Britain, EU, Switzerland, Nordics, Australia, Japan, Germany, France, Benelux), training of ECP and polling staff (Britain, EU, Canada), and FATA voter education (Japan).  Comment  12.  (C)  While there are significant obstacles, post remains convinced that a generally free and fair election can be achieved in Pakistan in 2007.  To do so, however, we and other international donors must be prepared to commit significant resources early-on in the process in order to shift a non-permissive electoral environment.  To date, every other major donor in Pakistan is well behind us on electoral planning, a state of affairs that should not be allowed to continue if we are to achieve the progress that we desire. Post will continue to press like-minded donors through the existing working group on elections, but we believe that absent engagement with capitals and Washington progress will be slow.  Post welcomes Washington assistance in overcoming this obstacle and building the needed international coalition to support elections in Pakistan. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE69610", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/5/2006 12:44", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 008207  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ENRG, KNNP, PARM, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: DENIAL OF COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR SANDIA LABS VISITORS  REF: STATE 69610  1.  Post regrets that it is unable to offer country clearance to reftel visitors due to the limited advance notice, While post strongly supports the objectives of the mission, visits like this, involving numerous meetings (especially in other cities) will require more than four days notice.  2.  If visitors wish to reschedule, Embassy would recommend late June or July as a possible time frame, and would encourage visitors to be in touch with Political Counselor Tim Wilder (wilderte@state.gov) to finalize a notional itinerary in advance. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE72603", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/9/2006 5:58", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 008327  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: BG, EG, ID, IR, IS, IZ, MOPS, MY, NI, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: D-8 DEMARCHE DELIVERED  REF: STATE 72603  (SBU)  On May 8, Poloff delivered D-8 demarche (reftel) to MFA UN Director, Sadia Altaf.  She said she would pass them along to the Pakistani delegation as soon as possible, though she noted that the delegation had already departed Islamabad for the May 9-13 D-8 summit in Bali. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/9/2006 5:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 008328  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/09/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP REQUESTS INFORMATION FOR GUATANAMO DETAINEES   1. (C)  The Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs delivered a diplomatic note dated May 3 requesting complete addresses and other personal information to confirm Pakistani nationality for Guatanamo Bay detainees who have been identified by the Pentagon for release.  Full text of the note follows:  (Begin text.)  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad and with reference to the latest list of the names/nationalities of the Guatanamo Bay detainees released by the Pentagon last month has the honour to request provision of complete addresses/other relevant identity particulars of the Pakistani detainees for conformation of their nationalities.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the esteemed Embassy, the assurances of its highest consideration.  (End text.)  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE65201|06STATE73151", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/9/2006 16:04", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 008391  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/09/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER, KFIN, ECON, UN SUBJECT: TERROR FINANCE:  JI-4 AND JUD DOMESTIC DESIGNATION  REF: A. STATE 65201      B. STATE 73151  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On April 28, 2005, poloff presented to MFA (UN) Deputy Director Shazia Ashraf Qazi non-papers containing the notice of the UN 1267 Committee designation of four members of Jemaah Islamiya (Ref A) and notice of the U.S. domestic designation of Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JUD) (Ref B).  On May 4, poloff spoke with Qazi's MFA superior, UN Director Imran Ahmed Siddiqui, who confirmed that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) had initiated publication of the notice of the Jamaah Islamiya designation as soon as it had received word of the 1267 Committee's action from its UN Mission in late April. Siddiqui said that that the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) and Ministry of Finance (MinFin) would take all necessary action to determine whether the four Jemaah Islamiya members have assets in Pakistan and, if so, to freeze those accounts. Siddiqui also acknowledged the domestic designation of JUD by the U.S.  2.  (C)  Post will monitor MFA, SBP and MinFin action against the Jemaah Islamiya members to assess the efficacy of the GOP's terror finance sanctions procedures. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE75442", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/11/2006 9:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 008487  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, PK, OVIP SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR US GOVERNORS DELEGATION  REF: STATE 75442  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Gov. Mitt Romney, Gov. Matt Blunt, Gov. Mark Sanford, Gov. Brian Schweitzer, Anthony Welcher, Dan Wilmot, Ltc. Kurt Vogel, Capt. Ernest Barringer, Eddie Johnson, Barbara Davis, and Maj. Matt Green for May 25 and 26.  The purpose of the visit is to transit Pakistan en route to and from Afghanistan.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Political Officer, Mohammed Motiwala.  He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Cell: 0300-501-2202.  3.  The control officer will meet visitors upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad.  Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  4.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  5. Visas: Unless only transiting Pakistan, everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  6.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  7.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  8.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  9.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  10.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  11. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/16/2006 2:07", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 008829  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/15/2016 TAGS: MASS, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: S/CT AMB CRUMPTON ENCOURAGES ROBUST GOP COUNTERTERRORISM ACTION   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Introduction and summary:  Visiting Islamabad on May 3-4, S/CT Ambassador Henry Crumpton and S/CT Senior Advisor Michael Hurley engaged political, diplomatic and military interlocutors on Pakistan's counterterrorim (CT) strategies and policies.  Calling on National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz, Foreign Secretary Mohammad Riaz Khan and Director - Military Operations BG Nasser Janjua, Crumpton commended his interlocutors on Pakistan's political commitment to the Global War on Terror (GWOT) and queried them on the government's CT priorities.  Tariq Aziz and BG Nasser described in detail the GOP's three-tiered strategy for denying Islamic extremists safe haven in the tribal areas along the Pak-Afghan border.  Tariq Aziz indicated his willingness to work with he Afghan counterpart to identify tribal leaders that could restore stability to the region, and reaffirmed the GOP's support for Afghanistan's political development.  He shared his assessment that a military confrontation between the U.S. and Iran would seriously destabilize Pakistan and the region, and said that President Musharraf was grateful for President Bush's comments on Kashmir during his March 2005 visit to Islamabad.  ForSec Riaz Khan also discussed GOP policies toward the FATA, but was stumped when AMB Crumpton asked about the Foreign Office's top priorities for advancing CT policy.  BG Nasser presented a detailed briefing on the army's military operations in the tribal areas, agreeing with AMB Crumpton that the success of the GOP's counter-insurgency strategy rests as  much on progress on political integration and economic and social development as on military victory. End summary and introduction.  (Note:  AMB Crumpton's meeting with Pakistan Interior Minister Sherpao will be reported septel.  End note.)  NSA Tariq Aziz --------------  2. (C)  AMB Crumpton underscored for Tariq Aziz the importance the U.S. attaches to the bilateral relationship, including cooperation on CT.  Aziz stressed the importance of understanding the root causes of terrorism throughout the Moslem world and the need to combat it with both political and military actions.  Aziz has advised the British, as they prepare to move into Afghanistan,s Helmand province, to revive tactics from their imperial past and work as much as possible through locally dominant proxies.  The important thing, he explained, is to avoid taking unnecessary British casualties, which might create domestic pressure in the UK to pull troops out.  Pakistan opposed to a premature withdrawal of UK or U.S. forces from Afghanistan; it is essential that the coalition succeed, but succeed sooner rather than later.  3. (C)  Turning to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), Aziz said a multifaceted FATA Development Plan was under development, but the government had not yet made a final determination on who should lead the effort.  The leader should be a Pashtun familiar with the local environment, he added.  Former Chief Secretary of the NWFP Sahibzada Imtiaz was a good bureaucrat, with a lot of experience and a reputation for honesty, but had not been definitively selected for the position  4. (C)  When Aziz asked whether the U.S. was satisfied with Pakistan,s performance in the war on terror, Ambassador Crumpton assured him that there was no question as to Pakistan,s political commitment, adding that no country had captured or killed more Al Qaida operatives.  Aziz noted that Pakistan is under tremendous pressure from terrorists, but that President Musharraf was convinced that fighting terrorists vigorously was in Pakistan,s own interest.  ISLAMABAD 00008829  002 OF 003   Responding to AMB Crumpton, Aziz confirmed that Pakistan was getting necessary support from Saudi Arabia, the UAE and others, as the Gulf countries shared Pakistan,s concerns regarding the spread of Al Qaida.  5.  (C)  The challenge in Waziristan was exacerbated, Aziz said, by the assimilation of foreign elements into local tribal societies:  it is not uncommon now for Waziri tribal elders to have grandchildren born to foreign militants, who remained in the area after the anti-Soviet jihad and married local women.  These family ties created deep loyalties.  Aziz hoped that Asfandyar Wali Khan, leader of the Awami National Party (ANP) and scion of a renowned Pushtoon nationalist family, could play a helpful role, explaining that the ANP had ties on both sides of the border.  The ANP was \"totally moderate\" and \"anti-Mullah\"; because of its deeper ties in the region, it was better equipped than the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) to serve as a moderating influence.  6.  (S)  Aziz reported that Afghan National Security Advisor Zalmay Rassoul had called recently to say the two should \"be in touch with each other.\"   It was in Pakistan,s national interest that Afghanistan succeed, Aziz added.  Pakistan could not accept the reinvigoration of the Taliban.  Although the message \"may not have filtered down,\" Aziz said that President Musharraf had opposed the Taliban even before 9/11.  Unfortunately Northern Alliance elements in Afghanistan doubted Pakistan,s anti-Taliban credentials.  Aziz agreed that he and Rassoul should meet to discuss these issues; he endorsed AMB Crumpton,s suggestion that the two could \"compare notes\" on tribal leaders on both sides of the border that could serve as common allies.  Aziz said that he and Rassoul could perhaps identify influential leaders, give them responsibility to police their areas, supply them with weapons and hold them accountable.  Cash was often a very effective inducement to cooperation, he observed, and if 30-40 percent of it was \"pocketed\" by these influential leaders, then it was a small price to pay and should be overlooked.  Currently, neither the Afghans nor the Pakistanis had the full support of the local populations, and those that did support them were not properly armed and trained.  7.  (C)  Aziz expressed concern about the fallout in Pakistan from the \"Iran situation,\" especially in view of Pakistani elections scheduled for 2007.  Military action against Iran would pose and enormous political challenge for Musharraf, he said.  It would be exploited by Mullahs, who would argue that Pakistan was next in line after Iran.  However, sanctions against Iran would be \"livable\" he judged.  Aziz promised to think about what role Pakistan could play in Iran, but he explained that the current leader of Iran had \"gone mad\" and it was unclear that he would listen to Musharraf, who was perceived as pro-western.  8.  (C)  Aziz said that President Bush,s visit had gone well -- contrary to popular perceptions -- and that Pakistan welcomed the President,s comments on Kashmir.  He asserted that Pakistan wanted an \"honorable exit\" from Kashmir.  \"We don,t want territory; we want a resolution of the conflict.\"  Aziz concluded by stressing, the importance of continuity and stability in the U.S. Pakistan relationship going beyond the war on terror.  \"We have a perception that when you are done, you,ll leave us high and dry,\" he said.  It was in the U.S. interest to counter this perception because for decades to come Pakistan would remain strategically significant -- \"either as a problem or as an asset.\"  Foreign Secretary Muhammad Riaz Khan ------------------------------------  9.  (C)  Introducing himself to ForSec Riaz Khan, AMB  ISLAMABAD 00008829  003 OF 003   Crumpton expressed appreciation for excellent bilateral CT cooperation, which the USG would like to expand.  Responding to AMB Crumpton's comment that his key concern is eliminating the safe haven along the Pak-Afghan border that is exploited by al Qaidaa and Taliban forces, the ForSec noted that this is also a key GOP concern.  Reviewing the legacy of the anti-Soviet jihad and subsequent years of turmoil in Afghanistan, Riaz Khan called for greater cooperation between Islamabad and Kabul to stabilize the border area.  Noting the three-tier strategy for the FATA advanced by President Musharraf, the ForSec urged the U.S, to move quickly on Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs) to accelerate economic development along the border.  Riaz Khan was at a loss for a quick response, however, when AMB Crumpton asked him to describe the MFA's priorities for advancing Pakistan's CT objectives; he said only that the Foreign Office plays a traditional role in facilitating bilateral dialogue and arrangements (e.g., extradition treaties) in support of broader GOP CT goals.  Director - Military Operations BG Nasser Janjua --------------------------------------------- --  10.  (C)  BG Nasser Janjua presented a detailed briefing on the Pakistan Army's strategy and tactics for combating al Qaida, Taliban and other violent extremists in the FATA. (Note:  Embassy will forward an electronic copy of BG Nasser's full presentation to S/CT.  End note.)   AMB Crumpton was particularly interested in Pak mil tactics for managing the broader counter-insurgency campaign;  BG Nasser responded by describing the deep tribal loyalties and traditions that present a serious challenge to stabilizing the region, as the mere presence of 80,000 Pakostani troops on tribal lands is considered an affront to tribal sovereignty.  This prolonged military presence, along with collateral civilian casualties search-and-destroy operations, are being exploited by al Qaida and Taliban forces, who engage in assassination campaigns against tribal leaders who cooperate with GOP authorities.  Human intelligence collection is particularly difficult, BG Nasser noted, as potential sources are well aware of the potential for quick, lethal reprisal.  BG Nasser said CENTCOM, with whom Pak mil works hand-in-glove, knows that the GOP has made a serious commitment to dislodge Islamic militants from the FATA.  He was concerned that, during a recent visit to Washington, he sensed that this commitment was not recognized by civilian USG officials.  AMB Crumpton noted that the State Department's 2005 Country Report on Terrorism highlights Pakistan's strong performance in the GWOT, and pledged that he would always be clear when speaking of the U.S.-Pakistani CT partnership.  The meeting concluded with AMB Crumpton and BG Nasser agreeing that the U.S., Pakistan and Afghanistan should work to identify tribal leaders who could advance common counter-insurgency objectives. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE66895", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/16/2006 10:52", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 008845  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO NEA, EB, L, TREASURY, COMMERCE/BIS/OAC AND USTR  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KBCT, ABLD, PHUM, PIRF, AL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTANI COMPLIANCE WITH OIC AND AL BOYCOTTS AGAINST ISRAEL  REF: STATE 66895  1.  Post offers the following response to reftel queries regarding Pakistani observance of boycotts of Israel and Israeli-made products.  2.  Pakistan is not a member of the Arab League (AL) and is not, therefore, bound by the AL boycott (ALB).  3.  Pakistan is a member of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) and a signatory to the Resolution 1/3-P (IS) of the Makkah Summit (January 25-28, 1981)  4.  Though there is no such legislation in the corporate law to prohibit Pakistani companies from trading with Israel, to trade with any foreign country, local companies must get clearance from the country,s foreign office. As the Government of Pakistan (GOP) does not recognize the State of Israel, such clearances would be virtually impossible for a local company to obtain.  Multinational companies ) e.g., Citibank, Pepsi, Coca-Cola ) operating in Pakistan are not subject to any conditions related to the OIC boycott.  5.  The GOP does not put any conditions requiring U.S. or international firms to sign affidavits, boycott compliance questionnaires, or boycott-clearance certificates regarding trade with Israel.  6.  As the GOP places no bar on foreign companies regarding trade with Israel, it does not require foreign firms to provide periodic compliance reports.  7.  GSO/Procurement routinely conducts business with Pakistani companies and local franchises of foreign companies.  GSO/Procurement is not aware of any boycott compliance requirements made by the GOP on U.S. companies doing business with the post.  8.  As it is not an Arab League member, Pakistan has no Arab League Boycott office.  Pakistan has not complied with OIC calls to establish Islamic Boycott Offices in the member states.  9.  The post is not aware of any instances of unauthorized boycott compliance enforcement by a recalcitrant government office or officer.  If such a situation were to occur, foreign companies have recourse to in national courts and could request the GOP to take legal action against such offices. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/18/2006 11:22", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 009088  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/18/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, IR, TK SUBJECT: AT D-8 SUMMIT, PAKISTAN AND TURKEY TELL IRAN TO CHANGE COURSE  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S)  Prior to his departure to the D-8 Summit in Bali last week, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz told the Ambassador that he and Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan would be meeting with Iranian President Ahmedinejad and asked if we had any advice.  As conveyed to SCA and NEA Ambassador told Aziz that we hoped that, as two of Iran's most powerful neighbors, he and his Turkish colleague would make clear to the Iranian President that he is isolated in the region, as well as internationally, and is following a course that is dangerously destabilizing for the area.  They had an excellent offer from the EU-3.  Aziz, who is on an extended trip abroad, said that he would have Foreign Minister Kasuri provide a read-out upon Kasuri's return from Bali.  2.  (S)  On May 17, FM Kasuri described the exchange with Ahmedinejad at the D-8 Summit to the Ambassador.  According to Kasuri, PM Aziz and Turkish PM Erdogan met privately with President Ahmedinejad, conveying a direct message that Tehran must change course regarding its nuclear program, as the current direction was neither in Iran's nor the region's interest.  Aziz and Erdogan described the current EU-3 proposal, with Russian enhancements, as a very attractive offer for Iran; Tehran should accept it and forego it's weapons program.  Aziz and Erdogan also condemned Ahmedinejad's statements attacking Israel as completely unacceptable and serving no purpose, citing the Ahmedinejad's description of Shimon Perez as a modern Hitler as particularly offensive.  3.  (S)  FM Kasuri, who did not participate in the Aziz-Erdogan-Ahmedinejad meeting, said that Ahmedinejad assured Aziz and Erdogan that Iran is a peaceful nation that will consider any reasonable way forward.  The Iranian president said that he is ready to work with the international community to strengthen the NPT and will consider any suggestions toward that end.  4.  (S)  FM Kasuri told the Ambassador that PM Aziz believes that Iran is looking for a face-saving way out of its present predicament, even though Ahmedinejad did not say this explicitly.  Aziz urged Ahmedinejad to publicly announce that Iran would immediately place a moratorium on uranium enrichment, in order to give the EU-3 an opening to re-engage Tehran in constructive dialogue. Ahmedinejad did not reject this suggestion.  5.  (S)  Offering his personal assessment following the Aziz-Erdogan intervention in Bali and his own encounter with the Iranian FM at the May 5 Economic Cooperation Organization meeting in Baku, Kasuri believes that Iran seriously wants a dialogue with the U.S., seeing it as a possible way out of the corner into which it has painted itself.  Kasuri concluded by noting that the continuing controversy over Tehran's nuclear program is deeply troubling to Pakistan, as any overt action against Iran would be devastating for Pakistan's internal security. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE79256", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/18/2006 11:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 009098  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/18/2016 TAGS: KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  US TO TABLE FMCT DRAFT  REF: STATE 79256  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On May 18, poloff delivered reftel demarche points to MFA Disarmament Cell Director Muhammad Kamran Akhtar, who had already received a fax from Pakistan's Geneva Mission on U.S plans to table a draft Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) at the Conference for Disarmament (CD).  Akhtar said that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) would welcome the start of serious negotiations on the FMCT and looked forward to working with the United States in the negotiations.  Akhtar also indicated that verification is very important to the GOP:  given the current state of bilateral relations between Pakistan and India, each country would be suspicious of the other's compliance if there was no international mechanism for verification.  Akhtar stressed that the GOP's concerns regarding verification are specifically based on these regional considerations. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE66895", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/19/2006 7:03", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 009152  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO NEA, EB, L, TREASURY, COMMERCE/BIS/OAC AND USTR  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KBCT, ABLD, PHUM, PIRF, AL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTANI COMPLIANCE WITH OIC AND AL BOYCOTTS AGAINST ISRAEL  REF: STATE 66895  1.  Post offers the following response to reftel queries regarding Pakistani observance of boycotts of Israel and Israeli-made products.  2.  Pakistan is not a member of the Arab League (AL) and is not, therefore, bound by the AL boycott (ALB).  3.  Pakistan is a member of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) and a signatory to the Resolution 1/3-P (IS) of the Makkah Summit (January 25-28, 1981)  4.  Though there is no such legislation in the corporate law to prohibit Pakistani companies from trading with Israel, to trade with any foreign country, local companies must get clearance from the country,s foreign office. As the Government of Pakistan (GOP) does not recognize the State of Israel, such clearances would be virtually impossible for a local company to obtain.  Multinational companies ) e.g., Citibank, Pepsi, Coca-Cola ) operating in Pakistan are not subject to any conditions related to the OIC boycott.  5.  The GOP does not put any conditions requiring U.S. or international firms to sign affidavits, boycott compliance questionnaires, or boycott-clearance certificates regarding trade with Israel.  6.  As the GOP places no bar on foreign companies regarding trade with Israel, it does not require foreign firms to provide periodic compliance reports.  7.  GSO/Procurement routinely conducts business with Pakistani companies and local franchises of foreign companies.  GSO/Procurement is not aware of any boycott compliance requirements made by the GOP on U.S. companies doing business with the post.  8.  As it is not an Arab League member, Pakistan has no Arab League Boycott office.  Pakistan has not complied with OIC calls to establish Islamic Boycott Offices in the member states.  9.  The post is not aware of any instances of unauthorized boycott compliance enforcement by a recalcitrant government office or officer.  If such a situation were to occur, foreign companies have recourse to in national courts and could request the GOP to take legal action against such offices.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/22/2006 12:45", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 009336  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/22/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AF SUBJECT: NSA TARIQ AZIZ READY TO REACH OUT TO AFGHAN COUNTERPART  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  During a May 22 conversation, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz told Ambassador that Pakistan's senior leaders are increasingly concerned by both the security situation in Afghanistan and by public accusations by Afghanistan President Karzai and Foreign Minister Spanta blaming Pakistan for the surge in Taliban attacks on Afghan and Coalition forces.  Presidential Chief of Staff LTG Hamid Javaid and Aziz have counseled an irritated President Musharraf to exercise restraint, to avoid yet another spiral of unhelpful cross-border rhetoric.  2.  (S)  According to Aziz, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) fully appreciates that the situation on the ground is serious, hence President Musharraf's active engagement on Pakistan's three-tiered FATA strategy.  Aziz confirmed that former 11th Corps Commander LTG (ret) Ali Muhammad Jan Orakzai will replace  Khalid ur-Rehman as Governor in the North West Frontier Province (NWFP), and that the President is serious about installing new, stronger Political Agents to implement political reforms and engage the tribes on economic and social development.  The Taliban pose the same threat on both sides of the border, Aziz noted, saying that Kabul and Islamabad should cooperate on confronting this common danger.  3.  (S)  The Ambassador suggested that Aziz call Afghan NSA Zalimay Rasool to invite him to Islamabad to brief him on the GOP's FATA strategy and explore coordinated Pak-Afghan action.  Aziz replied that he had considered such a step, but was concerned that, in the current atmosphere, there was too great a chance that President Karzai would prohibit Rasool from accepting Aziz' invitation -- a scenario best avoided, as a rejected invitation would enrage President Musharraf. After the Ambassdor pointed out that it should not be too difficult to manage a phone conversation that avoided such an outcome, Aziz telephoned Afghan Ambassador Tarzi and asked him to set up a telephone consultation with Rasool.  When Tarzi responded that Rasool was with President Karzai in Dubai, Aziz asked that a call be arranged after  Rasool's return to Kabul on May 23.  4.  (S)  Comment:  The steady barrage cross-border criticism targeted at Islamabad the past two weeks neither helps the GOP stabilize the FATA or execute the security operations necessary to deny anti-Coalition militias safe haven along the Pak-Afghan border.  Post believes that the sooner Aziz and Rasool can speak to each other directly, the sooner the two governments can direct their energies toward their common enemy.  Facilitating an Aziz-Rasool telephone call is a first step -- and if Aziz extends an invitation for face-to-face consultations, we hope that Embassy Kabul will encourage Rasool to accept. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06NEWDELHI3466", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/22/2006 13:16", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 009358  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IN, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTANI COMMENTS ON UPCOMING SIACHEN-SIR CREEK TALKS  REF: NEW DELHI 3466  1.  (U)  Summary.  The Pakistani press has cast reports on the upcoming Composite Dialogue talks on Siachen glacier (May 23-24) and Sir Creek (May 25-26) in a lackluster light, mostly by lifting bylines from the Indian press.  There has been little discussion on what proposals the GOP will bring forth, but much analysis of a perceived divide between the Indian military and Indian PM Manmohan Singh.  Pakistani think-tankers expect the GOP to firmly reject India's demand to verify troop positions in Siachen, believing that India will present a compromise solution on Siachen at the talks this week.  End summary.  2.  (U)  This week's May 23-26 defense-secretary level talks on Siachen and Sir Creek will be held in New Delhi.  The Pakistani delegation will be headed by Defense Secretary Tariq Ghazi.  Accompanying him will be Additional Secretary Muhammad Ashraf Chaudhry and MFA India Director Zaheer Janjua.  Talks on Sir Creek will be headed by Additional Defense Secretary Ehsan-ul Haq Chaudhry.  Though two days are scheduled to discuss Sir Creek, the media's attention has been captured by the possibility of an Indian proposal to demilitarize Siachen.  3.  (U)  The Pakistani English-language press has re-published a variety of Indian articles on the upcoming talks.  Recently, coverage has focused on a perceived divide between the Indian military and PM Manmohan Singh, with predictions that this division could stall forward movement on resolving the Siachen dispute.  One paper, \"Dawn,\" quotes an unnamed senior GOP official who believes the talks will give final shape to a pact agreed upon by officials from both countries during recent \"informal talks.\"  There has been no comment in the press on what stance the GOP delegation will take in New Delhi.  4.  (SBU)  Pakistani experts from three Islamabad think-tanks were overly optimistic about the outcome of the upcoming talks on Siachen.  Khalid Mahmud, Institute of Regional Studies, cited recent Indian acquiescence on the Kishenganga dam design as a sign that India realizes that it must compromise to achieve progress on other, more contentious issues such as Kashmir.  He added that the willingness of PM Singh to take on India's military hawks on the Siachen issue shows that the Indian government is determined to hammer out a solid, workable solution soon.  All three experts interpret recent grumbling by senior GOP officials on the usefulness of the Composite Dialogue process as a factor  pushing the Indians to make concessions.  Tanveer Ahmed Khan, Institute of Strategic Studies, believes the outcome of this week's meetings will determine whether PM Singh will visit Islamabad this summer, making it in India's interest to ensure the May 23-26 meetings are positive and produce results. Interestingly, the Pakistani experts were not interested in discussing possible resolution of the Sir Creek boundary; Pervez Iqbal Cheema, Islamabad Policy Research Institute, noted that Sir Creek is of minimal strategic importance and a solution will be easy to formulate as Indo-Pak relations normalize.  5.  (SBU)  Comment:  Pakistani press reports have focused on Indian internal debate over Siachen, with little recognition that public debate and process is a natural element of Indian democracy.  Instead, Pakistani observers interpret PM Singh's \"struggle\" with the Indian military as a signal that India is is ready to meet Pakistani demands on Siachen.  Post's think-tank contacts were on the mark in relation to Pakistani frustrations with the Composite Dialogue process:  even President Musharraf has publicly called for an acceleration of the talks, especially in regard to meetings on sensitive issues such as Kashmir.  Poloffs regularly hear similar sentiments expressed by working-level GOP officials, who claim the Composite Dialogue process has only establishes bus  ISLAMABAD 00009358  002 OF 002   links instead of tackling the \"real issues\" of Kashmir, Siachen, and water disputes. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "04ISLAMABAD554", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/23/2006 12:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 009473  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, MARR, SNAR, KCRM, PTER, EAID SUBJECT: EXPLAINING THE SECURITY FORCES IN THE FATA  REF: 2004 ISLAMABAD 00554    1. (U) This cable provides an introduction to the myriad of security forces besides the regular Pakistani Army that operate in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and adjoining regions of the North West Frontier Province (NWFP).  2. (U) Frontier Corps.  The paramilitary Frontier Corps (FC) is the primary security force that operates in the FATA. The FC also operates in the Dir and Chitral districts of NWFP.  The FC is a formally trained, organized force of approximately 35,000 personnel commanded by Pakistani Army officers who are deputed to the Frontier Corps for three years from the Pakistani military.  FC recruits are drawn from the FATA tribes and units are posted in tribal agencies other than their own.  Under normal conditions the Frontier Corps is under the command of the Federal Ministry of Interior with the responsibility for anti-smuggling, anti-narcotics, and anti-terrorist operations, to patrol the western border and to maintain law and order and the writ of the government in the tribal areas.  However, since the beginning of operation Al Mizan in late 2001, the FC has been operating under wartime conditions.  During this period, 39 wings (or battalions) have been under the direct operational control of the Pakistani Army's 11th Corps.  Their missions include protecting and clearing lines of communications, conducting defensive and limited offensive operations along side the regular Pakistani Army and assisting the Pakistani Army in the formation of Lashkars.  3. (SBU) Frontier Constabulary.  The Frontier Constabulary force is a trained and disciplined law enforcement force that operates in the Frontier Regions (or FR).  There are six Frontier Regions that lie between the FATA and the settled districts of NWFP: Peshawar (excluding the city), Kohat, Bannu, Lakki, Tank, and Dera Ismail Khan.  The Frontier Constabulary reports to the provincial Home Department's Chief Secretary and is commanded by provincial police officers that join the constabulary on deputation from their department.  There are approximately 17,000 personnel that comprise the Frontier Constabulary.  A secondary mission of the Constabulary is to provide security for vital installations and foreign missions. Many Frontier Constabularies have been diverted to such tasks in Islamabad, Karachi and other cities (Note: It is unfortunate that the Frontier Corps and Frontier Constabulary share the same initials.  GOP officials and local media are apt to refer to both as \"FC,\" leading to frequent confusion as to which force is under discussion.  Post has even encountered senior GOP officials who were unaware that two different \"FC\" security forces operate in the FATA and Frontier Regions.\" End note)  4. (U) Levy Force.  Levy forces are drawn from the tribal communities and are responsible for day-to-day crime control in the FATA.  They are appointed by and report to the Politcal Agent of the relevant Agency and carry government-provided weapons.  Currently, levy forces number around 5,000 personnel and operate only in the Bajaur, Kurram and Orakzai agencies.  5. (U) Khasadar Force.  The Khasadars are present in all 7 FATA agencies and the 6 Frontier Regions.  They have no formal training, must provide their own weapons, and function similarly to levies.  They are under the supervision of the Political Agent of the agency concerned. Recruits,  numbering approximately 19,000, are drawn from local tribes in order to garner tribal support for the Political Agents and for the government projects the Khasadars are assigned to protect.  Notable families of the tribes control job allocation in the Khasadar force within their tribe through a hereditary system.  6. (U) Tribal Lashkars.  Tribal Lashkars are ad-hoc forces gathered from a particular tribe or from a few tribes under  ISLAMABAD 00009473  002 OF 002   certain compelling circumstances by the tribal jirga of elders, usually on the advice of the Political Agent of the area.  Typically, Lashkars are called for search operations in particular villages and disband after the accomplishment of a particular task. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE81632", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/23/2006 12:54", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 009486  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, IZ, KDEM SUBJECT: GOP PM AZIZ CONGRATULATES NEW IRAQI PRIME MINISTER  REF: A. STATE 81632       B. GRENCIK - ENGELKEN EMAIL 22 MAY 06  On May 22, the Ambassador spoke with Foreign Secretary Muhammad Riaz Khan to urge the GOP to publicly support Iraq's new prime minister. (Ref A)  The Foreign Secretary agreed that the international community should voice its support for Prime Minister al-Maliki and his government, citing the congratulatory statement by Pakistani PM Shaukat Aziz issued by the MFA earlier that afternoon. (Ref B)  The text of PM Aziz's statement is reproduced below:  (Begin text.)  Press Release  Following is the text of the message of felicitations from Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz addressed to H.E. Mr. Jawad Al Maliki, on assumption of the office of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq:  \"Quote  Excellency,  On behalf of the Government and people of Pakistan, it gives me great pleasure to convey our warm felicitations to Your Excellency on your appointment as Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq.  We sincerely hope that the endeavours of your government is steering Iraq through its difficult phase and returning it to stability and economic prosperity are very soon met with success.  In Pakistan, we have been steadfast in our support to our brothers in Iraq and remain committed to extending a helping hand for the country's rebuilding efforts.  Please accept, Excellency, my sincere wishes for your well-being and for the progress and prosperity of the brotherly people of Iraq.  (Shaukat Aziz) Prime Minister of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  His Excellency Mr. Jawad Ali Maliki, Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq\".  Unquote\"  Islamabad May 22, 2006  (End text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9033", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/23/2006 13:54", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 009499  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/23/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, IR SUBJECT: PM AZIZ TO TALK SENSE TO IRANIAN VICE PRESIDENT AND FOREIGN MINISTER  REF: ISLAMABAD 9033  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S)  During a May 23 conversation with the Ambassador, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz mentioned that he had invited Iranian First Vice President Parvaiz Davudi and Foreign Minister Narnal Kharazii to visit Islamabad on May 25.  Referring to Iranian President Ahmedinejad's public statements in the days following the recent D-8 Summit, at which Aziz and Turkish PM Erdogan privately pressed Ahmedinejad to avoid direct confrontation with the international community over Iran's nuclear programs (ref A), Aziz admitted that his advice clearly made little impression on the Iranian president. Aziz told the Ambassador that he plans to deliver the same message that he gave Ahmedinejad  -- that the EU-3 have offered Iran an attractive deal, one which Tehran should seriously consider -- to his Iranian guests this week.  The Prime Minister noted that Vice President Davudi has a reputation of being a more reasonable interlocutor; perhaps he will better appreciate Pakistan's concern that a negotiated resolution addressing Tehran's nuclear program be found before the controversy spreads beyond Iran's borders, destabilizing the entire region. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD13942|06ISLAMABAD15599|06ISLAMABAD1885|06ISLAMABAD3985|06ISLAMABAD498|06ISLAMABAD7164|06ISLAMABAD8115|06ISLAMABAD8541|06ISLAMABAD9473|06PESHAWAR122|06PESHAWAR143|06PESHAWAR440|06PESHAWAR546|06PESHAWAR597|06PESHAWAR95", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/24/2006 12:07", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 009585  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PL, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: FATA: MISSION PAKISTAN REPORTING AND ASSISTANCE PLANS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 007164      B. ISLAMABAD 01885      C. ISLAMABAD 08541  ISLAMABAD 00009585  001.2 OF 004   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (SBU) Summary. This cable is intended to inform the inter-agency discussion on how to stimulate counterrorism progress, stability, and political change in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas. Mission Pakistan--in biweekly \"Interagency FATA Working Group\" meetings that include officers from NAS, RAO, ODRP, FAS, USAID, REF, POL, ECON, DAO, LEGAT, and Consulate Peshawar--has been working on ways to further FATA reform since August 2005. The FATA Working Group discusses the robust ongoing USG assistance effort in the region, identifies future assistance opportunities, and strategizes solutions the overall problems in the FATA. In the past year, Post has reported on the basic problems in the FATA (ref A), outlined current USG efforts and opportunities for increased assistance (ref B), and informed Washington readers about new challenges and opportunities in FATA. Over the next three months, Post will produce a series of analytic reports that assess opportunities for increased USG assistance in FATA, examine GOP's FATA reform efforts (their military/ stabilization, political/administrative, and economic development strategies), and evaluate the effectiveness of key GOP players in FATA reform. End Summary.  SNAPSHOT OF EMBASSY REPORTING ON FATA ------------------------------------- 2. (S) The following is a list of cables released by Embassy Islamabad and Consulate Peshawar detailing different aspects of the challenges and opportunities in the FATA:  Review of USG Present and Future Assistance in FATA (Islamabad 08115, February 2005)  FATA Democracy (Peshawar 00440, 25 August, 2005)  North Waziristan Operations Hailed as a Blow to Al Qaida (Islamabad 13942, 19 September 2005)  Pakistan Earthquake: No Effect on Operations in FATA (Islamabad 15599, 18 October 2005)  FATA Agency Councils  (Peshawar 00546, 27 October 2005)  FATA At the Crossroads: Accountability and Governance (Peshawar 00597, 25 November 2005)  Violence Grows in North and South Waziristan (Islamabad 00498, 14 January 2006)  Talibanization of Waziristan (Peshawar 00095, 24 February 2006)  Military and Militants Clash in North Waziristan (Islamabad 03985, 10 March 2006)  The North Waziristan Offensive (Peshawar 00122, 13 March 2006)  NWFP PML Chief Proposes A Strategy for Waziristan (Peshawar 0143, 27 March 2006)  A FATA Primer  (ISLAMABAD 007164, 26 April 2006)  ISLAMABAD 00009585  002.2 OF 004    GOP Announces New Strategy for FATA (Islamabad 008541, 10 May 2006)  Explaining the Security Forces in FATA (ISLAMABAD 09473, 22 May 2006)  MISSION PAKISTAN REPORTING PLAN: 3 Month Look-Ahead --------------------------------------------- ------ 3. (SBU) To inform the inter-agency debate on problems and opportunities in FATA, Embassy Islamabad and Consulate Peshawar plan a series of cables assessing GOP's strategies for the FATA and presenting opportunities (and constraints) for increased USG assistance.  The GOP,s Political Goals in FATA Tentative Release Date: May 25-30 2006  Options for New USG Assistance (UPDATE OF ISLAMABAD 08115) Tentative Release Date: Late May-Early June 2006  Evaluation of Musharraf,s post-7/7/05 crackdown promises as they pertain to FATA Tentative Release Date: May 25-30, 2006  GOP Military Strategy in the FATA Tentative Release Date: Early June 2006  GOP,s FATA Development Strategy: Tentative Release Date: Mid-late June 2006  FATA GOVERNOR AND SECRETARIAT: Role, Effectiveness, Performance Status: Mid July 2006 (to give enough time for new governor to get up to speed)  (Note: The FATA Working Group has acquired a significant knowledge-base over the past year, but with the impending summer transfer season, Posts' remaining expertise on FATA will be limited until new officers are able to get upto speed. End note.)  CURRENT USG ASSISTANCE ---------------------- 9. (SBU) As outlined in Ref B, the USG has an ongoing robust assistance program in FATA, managed by several different Agencies. This includes:  (U) State/INL (Narcotics Affairs)  --Border Security Roads: Over $30 million to build over 300 km. of border security roads in Khyber, Khurram, North and South Waziristan, and Orakzai Agencies, working with the Pakistan Army Corps of Engineers.  Construction started in Spring 2004. Progress has been slow due to security and weather conditions. Work has effectively stopped in North and South Waziristan since late Summer 2005 because of ongoing CT operations and the security situation. Road construction is accompanied by small schemes (water and electrification) to increase community buy-in.  -- Frontier Corps Outposts:  NAS has funded construction of 26 border outposts in FATA for the FC; 19 have been completed.  Construction of the remaining even posts, all in North Waziristan, has been stalled due to security conditions.  --Equipping Frontier Corps/NWFP: We are currently procuring $7.75 million for vehicles, communication equipment, night vision goggles, bullet proof jackets/helmets through FY 2005 supplemental Funds. We have provided such equipment to Frontier Corps since 2002.  --Counter Narcotics: We have been involved in road building for enforcement and market access, and alternative  ISLAMABAD 00009585  003 OF 004   development projects in Mohmand and Bajaur Agencies since 1989.  Similar projects began in Khyber Agency in 2001. We also provide support for poppy monitoring and eradication in FATA.  --Levies Training: When the final Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is signed with the SAFRON ministry, NAS will begin the $686K refurbishment of the Levies Central Training Facility in Bajaur Agency.  NAS will also provide technical assistance with curriculum development and instructor development training through ICITAP.  (S) Military Assistance (ODRP), including:  (Note: This section includes ODRP resources allocated Pakistan-wide because a majority of this support and funding is intended for the GWOT. End Note)  --Coalition Support Funds (on average $80 million per month) provided to the Federal Government as a reimbursement for operational expenses in support of OEF. Includes: reimbursement for the costs for feeding and housing 35,000 Army, 41,000 Frontier Corps, 1,500 Pak Air Force and 105 Pakistan Navy officials), ammunition, fuel, wear-and tear on vehicles and equipment used in direct support against Al Qaida and anti-Coalition militants.  (Note: ODRP indicates that while CSF has been worth the investment to date, because it encourages the Pakistan Military to deploy troops in areas it has been long been reluctant to enter, it may be time for a USG policy review on the issue. ODRP suggests that future CSF should not be guaranteed for mere presence; instead, reimbursement should be based on performance, and that CENTCOM/SECDEF should determine the criteria for reimbursement based on desired behavior. End note.)  --Foreign Military Financing: ODRP manages the $300 million per year allocated for shaping Pakistan's Defense Structure. To date, Pakistan has chosen to spend national funds and FMF against conventional defense needs instead of targeting procurement for training and equipment that would have higher utility in its internal GWOT. (Note: ODRP suggests more direct management of FMF to ensure GWOT-essential efforts are adequately resourced. End note.)  --Counter Narcotics: Through ODRP, DOD provided $22 million in FY06 to enhance Pakistan's ability to control the Makran Coast against the flow of narcotics through southern Pakistan.  In the process, Pakistan has enhanced its control of semi-governed territory and improved control of its southern borders.  --International Military Education and Training (IMET): ODRP manages $2.04 million per year in IMET funds to increase the mil-mil bonds, and fill in a 11-year gap in relations due to sanctions.  --Overseas Humanitarian Disaster Assistance and Civic Aid (OHDACA): ODRP manages a DOD pilot program of $800,000 as proof of a concept for providing assistance to FATA. This money supplements USAID's school construction projects throught the FATA.  --Counter Terrorism Fellowship Program: Through ODRP, DOD provided $500,000 in CT fellowship funds to accentuate education in subjects of value to the GWOT.  (U) Development Assistance (USAID) includes:  ---School Construction and Furnishing: USAID provided $4.7 million to the Pakistani firm, Associates in Development, to construct 65 primary, middle, and high schools in 6 agencies in the FATA. One school is completed, 44 are underway in  ISLAMABAD 00009585  004.2 OF 004   Khyber, Bajaur, Khurram, Mohmand, and Orakzai, and an additional 12 sites are being assessed and identified. Security considerations have delayed construction of 8 schools in North Waziristan.  Sanitary and drinking water are being provided by the $800,000 DOD OHDACA grant mentioned above. The Embassy of Japan has agreed to construct an additional 65 schools in FATA using USAID's design.  ---Scholarships for Pre-Service Teacher Education: 20 scholarships have been awarded to females from FATA to attend a one-year pre-service teacher education program in Khyber Agency. The Academy for Educational Development was awarded $200,000 to administer this program.  --Water/Sanitation: In September 2005, USAID awarded $400,000 to UNICEF to implement a program to improve water and sanitation facilities in 190 girls' schools in Khyber and Mohmand Agencies. Activities are also underway to provide hygiene and sanitation education to community members and parent-teacher associations.  USAID will also partner with the GOP to implement President Musharraf's Clean Drinking Water initiative in Bajaur, Mohmand, and Khurram. Under this program, GOP will construct water treatment plants and USAID will provide capacity building and training in plant and water-resource management and the promotion of hygiene practices.  USAID expects to award a grant in June 2006 for this project, which we anticipate will begin in early 2007.  --Microcredit: In September 2005, USAID provided $4 million to Khushalibank to establish stand-alone and mobile bank branches in all seven FATA Agencies. 50,000 loans and 1,000 small infrastructure schemes are to eventually be provided in the five-year program.  --Child Health: USAID plans to implement a child-health program in FATA to focus on increasing the access and availability of child health services, improving the quality of health services, and increasing awareness and knowledge at the househlold level.  USAID plans to award a grant in June 2006 for this project.  (S) Other USG Assistance for FATA  --Several other Agencies at Post also have projects related to FATA stability and GWOT. Details of programming and funding allocated may be reported via other channels. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9542", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2006 11:31", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 009696  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/10/2031 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: LIMITED PROGRESS ON DOMESTIC EXTREMISM  REF: ISLAMABAD 9542  ISLAMABAD 00009696  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (U) This is the third in a series of four cables assessing the GOP's progress in its crackdown on extremism.  2. (S/NF) Summary:  Progress on combating domestic extremism, part of the GOP's July 2005 crackdown, has suffered from competing priorities, limited political capital, and a vocal opposition from Islamic conservatives.  While initial GOP actions detained a number of second-tier leaders and foot soldiers from domestic extremist groups, shuttered hate publications, and forced groups to drop their public profile, these gains have, in large part, been allowed to lapse. Legislative changes to prevent discrimination against religious minorities continue to languish in parliament, held hostage by conservative elements in the ruling party. Attempts by the GOP to regulate madrassas have been persistently weakened in response to demands from madrassa leaders.  The Northern Areas, however, present a sharp contrast to the general trend.  There, a sustained campaign by security forces against both Sipah-i-Sahaba (SSP) and Sipah-i-Mohammad (SMP) has curtailed their operations and restored peace to the troubled Gilgit district.  End Summary.  Extremist Groups  3. (S/NF)  The country's prominent domestic extremist groups Sipah-i-Sahaba (SSP), Lashkar-i-Jhangvi (LJ), and Sipah-i-Mohammad (SMP) were among the first banned by President Musharraf in January 2002.  Sunni Tehrik escaped banning, due to its ties to senior military and government officials, and continued both its assassination campaign against Deobandi clerics and its political activities largely unimpeded.  Prior to their listing, banned groups engaged in regular assassination of each other's leaders and supporters, frequent mob violence against religious and political opponents, and outright armed clashes in certain Punjabi districts.  SSP and SMP maintained an active political wing, holding frequent public rallies and participating in elections, with the SSP regularly winning provincial and national assembly seats from its home district of Jhang.  4. (S/NF) Following the ban, these groups were required to take a lower public profile, curtailing public meetings; their militant wings, however, continued operations and SSP retained its Jhang seat.  Due to heightened scrutiny, the militant wings were required to curtail the scope of operations, focusing on higher profile suicide bombings of religious opponents' mosques and gatherings and assassinations of religious clergy.  When disputes over textbooks exploded into societal violence in the Northern Areas in 2004, SSP and SMP established armed wings in Gilgit, fomenting additional violence and turning the town into a battleground.  LJ, which had increased the scope of its activities to include Christian, Hindu, and western targets post-September 11, had already suffered a setback following its participation in the unsuccessful December 2004 attempts on President Musharraf's life:  many of its senior leaders were arrested and still remain in detention, and its activities were placed under closer scrutiny by intelligence and law enforcement officials.  Even so, the group was still able to carry out high profile, successful suicide attacks against Brailvi/Shi'a targets.  As of July 2005,  SSP, ST, and SMP leaders were at large, highly visible in public media, and actively participating in politics.  5. (S/NF) In the immediate aftermath of President Musharraf's July 2005 crackdown announcement, the prominence of all  ISLAMABAD 00009696  002.2 OF 003   sectarian groups, including ST, diminished.  Police detained approximately 320 second-tier leaders and activists from SSP, SMP, ST, and LJ under anti-terrorism provisions.  Main leaders of the organizations curtailed public events and press statements and, in some cases, effectively went into hiding.  Hate publications by domestic extremist, militant, and terrorist organizations were seized from vendors in major cities, and restrictions on radical clerics' use of mosque loudspeakers were put in place.  In late September 2005, security forces arrested senior LJ leader Asif Choto and successfully disrupted the activities of the organization's Islamabad/Rawalpindi cell.  In mid-October 2005, the GOP launched a security force operation in the Gilgit district to curtail the activities of SSP and SMP.  Local leaders of both groups were detained on terrorism charges (and remain in prison in Rawalpindi), supporters were disarmed, and order was largely restored to the town.  6. (S/NF) These gains against domestic extremist organizations were not sustained.  In the aftermath of the October 8 earthquake, government attention was largely diverted.  Approximately half of those detained were released within 30 days.  The remainder were freed by January 2006. Confiscation of hate publications effectively ceased in October 2005 and has, for the most part, not resumed.  In many urban areas, use of mosque loudspeakers for extremist propaganda resumed by October and November 2005.  Despite some restrictions on their activities both SSP and ST ran candidates in the local bodies elections in August and October 2005.  While we are unaware of any domestic extremist group participation in earthquake relief efforts, SSP, SMP, and ST all raised funds among supporters, ostensibly to aid earthquake victims.  This allowed their leaders to reassert a public presence that was further strengthened during protests over the Bajaur incident and the Danish cartoons.  SSP, SMP, and ST continued to assassinate the others' members and clerics from opposing religious sects.  SSP and LJ supporters were responsible for suicide bombings of religious gatherings, including the February 2006 attack in Hangu and the April 2006 attack in Karachi.  The April 2006 Karachi attack was a major setback for ST, as many of its leaders were killed in the suicide bombing.  A major SSP conference on the outskirts of Islamabad in mid-April is widely seen as evidence that restrictions on public activities by the domestic extremist organizations will again be ignored.  Madrassa Reform  7. (C/NF) Madrassa reform was already well-advanced prior to the July 2005 crackdown.  In June 2002, the GOP issued directives requiring registration of foreign students, banning foreign funding of madrassas, and requiring registration with one of the five independent madrassa boards or directly with the GOP.  Most madrassas complied with the student and school registration requirements.  While madrassas openly flouted the ban on foreign financing whenever possible, the ban did largely end government funding from Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states that previously supported a large number of such schools.  In addition, the GOP had negotiated agreements with the madrassa boards that resulted in the phased-in introduction of modern subjects at schools under their control and banned the teaching of sectarian hatred, militancy, or extremism.  8. (C/NF) As part of his July 2005 crackdown, Musharraf promised to ban foreign students, to require direct registration with the GOP, and to introduce a national examination scheme for madrassas.  Musharraf enacted the foreign student ban in July 2005 with an effective date of December 31, 2005.  Registered Afghan refugees were exempted  ISLAMABAD 00009696  003.2 OF 003   from this ban.  The Interior Ministry deported an unknown number of foreign students and claimed that 95 percent of foreign students had left madrassas.  Note:  We believe that the Interior Ministry tracking system is reliable.  End Note.  The GOP has no immediate plans to revise the ban on foreign students.  The GOP chose to negotiate with the madrassa boards on examination and registration.  Musharraf signed a December 2005 order on registration that requires a yearly description of educational activities and a financial auditor's statement for all registered madrassas.  It also bans the teaching of sectarian hatred, militancy, or extremism.  The order is a step back from earlier versions that would have required extensive yearly audits of madrassa finances and activities -- steps that would have enabled more effective GOP oversight.  Approximately 11,000 out of an estimated 13,000 to 15,000 madrassas have registered. Discussions on a national examination scheme continue between the madrassa boards and the Ministry of Religious Affairs. No madrassas have yet been closed for violations of either the post-September 11 or the July 2005 orders, nor has enforcement action been taken against those madrassas operated by domestic extremist groups and/or those teaching sectarian hatred, militancy, and extremism.  Comment  9. (S/NF) Islamist politicians and conservative religious clerics have vocally opposed all parts of the GOP crackdown on domestic extremism.  In addition, some in the GOP's own parliamentary party and in the opposition Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz have opposed action against SSP and ST and madrassa reform.  Liberal opposition parties have consistently refused to defend any action by the Musharraf government, leaving the GOP without political support for these initiatives.  In the face of strong societal backlash over Bajaur and the Danish cartoons and the upcoming national and provincial elections, the GOP has been reluctant to advance forcibly an admittedly controversial agenda.  While we understand the GOP's reluctance, renewed focus on domestic extremism is a critical component of meaningfully advancing Musharraf's \"enlightened moderation\" agenda.  The informal ties that many domestic extremist groups have developed with designated foreign terrorist organizations are equally worrying.  Sustained international pressure will be necessary to focus GOP attention on this component of the Global War on Terror.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD7771|06STATE50811", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2006 11:51", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 009703  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK, PHSA, KNNP, MNUC, PARM, PGOV SUBJECT: GOP DECLINES PSI INVITATION...AGAIN  REF: A. STATE 50811      B. ISLAMABAD 7771  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On May 23, the Ambassador joined the Polish Ambassador and British High Commissioner in a call on MFA UN Additional Secretary (UN, Policy Planning and Disarmament) Tariq Osman  SIPDIS Haider to press (again) for the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to participate in the June Senior Level Meeting on the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) in Warsaw (Ref B). The Polish AMB offered a detailed description of the history and goals of PSI.  After noting that \"observer' status at the Warsaw meeting is not/not an option, Ambassador and the British High Commissioner explained that the U.S. and UK are seeking the GOP's commitment to PSI principals, not to any particular path of implementation.  The Additional Secretary responded that the GOP is committed to non-proliferation.  It already has legislation for interdiction in its territorial waters, and it is now commanding CTF-150, which has both a counterterrorism and non-proliferation mission.  Haider concluded by saying that Pakistan prefers international agreements reached through UN processes.  If the GOP cannot go to the Warsaw meeting as observers, it will not attend, but will remain actively engaged on non-proliferation in other fora. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9472", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2006 11:52", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 009704  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PTER, MOPS, PK, AF, IR SUBJECT: FREE, FAIR, AND ISI: THE PML ELECTION STRATEGY  REF: ISLAMABAD 9472  ISLAMABAD 00009704  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d.  1. (C/NF)  Summary:  According to PML Secretary General Mushahid Hussain, the party's goal in the upcoming elections is a plurality in the National Assembly.  He identified urban areas in central Punjab (Lahore, Gujranwala, Faisalabad) as the chief battlegrounds, predicted a strong PML victory in Balochistan, anticipated a PML draw with the Awami National Party (ANP) and the Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) in NWFP, and conceded Sindh to the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) and the Pakistan People's Party (PPP). Despite assurances that the PML wanted a free and fair contest, Mushahid made clear that use of development resources, presidential campaigning, and research by the intelligence agencies were, in his view, legitimate tactics available to the PML.  Mushahid argued that the PML's winning strategy was a close relationship with Musharraf coupled with denigration of the PPP and the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) historic governance record.  Mushahid admitted that inflation and the deteriorating situation in Waziristan posed domestic problems for the party.  He called on the United States to refrain from provocative action in Iran and to do more to improve Pak-Afghan relations, claiming that both could be exploited by Islamist parties during the election. End Summary.  Electoral Strategy  2. (C/NF) In a May 25 meeting, PML Secretary General Mushahid Hussain provided a preview of his party's electoral strategy to Acting PolCouns and Poloff.  Mushahid stated that at this stage he believed that the PML would be running without a formal supporting coalition and that its national strategy would, therefore, focus principally on capturing a plurality of seats in the National Assembly.  In Punjab, Mushahid predicted that the PML would do well in rural areas and in nothern urban centers.  The chief battleground would be the central urban districts where the party would face strong opposition from the PPP and PML-N.  Winning these districts would be a priority, as they would likely determine the balance of power in the next Assembly.  In Balochistan, Mushahid predicted a strong PML showing in the center and south due to its close relationship with most sardars (save the rebellious troika of Bugti, Marri, and Mengal).  The party was prepared to cede northern constituencies to the JUI-F, which he believed could be bought into a coalition. In Sindh, Mushahid predicted a weak PML showing.  The provincial party was divided, and despite its proactive Chief Minister, there was little hope of dividing PPP from its rural base or MQM from its urban supporters.  In NWFP, Mushahid predicted an even race and possible seat adjustments between PML, ANP, and JUI-F.  The goal was to divide the Islamist coalition and build a new PML-led provincial government.  3. (C/NF) Mushahid's emerging campaign strategy for the PML would place primary emphasis on the party's close ties with President Musharraf.  The objective was to capture pro-Musharraf voters (youth, liberal middle class, and women), which strongly supported the President but not necessarily the party.  In this vein, the PML would stress the stability that Musharraf had brought to Pakistan and the differentiation between his regime and the corruption-laden governments of the PPP and PML-N.  Mushahid predicted that the PML would run a campaign that is one-third positive (focused on Musharraf's policies) and two-thirds negative (focused on the PPP and PML-N regimes' failures).  Mushahid would welcome the return of these parties' leaders, Benazir  ISLAMABAD 00009704  002.2 OF 003   Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, as both were easy targets for criticism.  However, he predicted that neither had any real desire to return to Pakistan.  Asked about potential electoral issues facing the PML, Mushahid cited inflation and the situation in Waziristan.  Mushahid was convinced that price controls on basic commodities and Gen. Orakzai's appointment as governor in NWFP would be sufficient to redress these problems.  4. (C/NF) Mushahid predicted that well-publicized differences within the PML were, in fact, transitory.  Party members, including the dissidents, recognized that their political futures were inextricably tied to the PML and Musharraf. Divides would be quickly repaired once the candidate selection process was formally underway, and dissidents sought tickets from the party leadership, which would control the allocation process.  According to Mushahid, PML tickets would be awarded based upon \"electability.\"  The party was looking for candidates with strong ties to their district; feudal lords and tribal leaders would be strong contenders. Approximately 70 percent of the PML assembly delegation had won solid majorities, and most, save a few \"troublemakers,\" would receive tickets.  Those with slim margins of victory could be replaced.  Free and Fair Elections  5. (S/NF) Mushahid stressed that the PML wanted a free and fair contest.  Its leaders were prepared to negotiate rules of the game with opposition parties and the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC).  A credible electoral process was necessary to provide the new government with the popular mandate required.  Several statements, during other parts of the conversation, however, called this commitment into question.  For instance, Mushahid stated that the PML would use development funds to support candidates in marginal districts; the President would actively campaign on behalf of the PML; and intelligence services would continue to conduct polling of PML and PML candidate popularity in key constituencies.  (Note: All are clear violations of election law and regulations.  End Note.)  Iran  6. (C/NF) Mushahid raised concern about the current stalemate with Iran.  He asserted that hostile American action against Iran would provide Pakistan's Islamist parties with an attractive election plank, possibly swaying the NWFP contest in their favor as the Afghanistan invasion had done in 2002. Mushahid recognized that rhetoric and actions by the Iranian presidency were not helpful in resolving the nuclear impasse.  For this reason, he and others in the GOP were reaching out to more moderate elements inside Iran including the Foreign Ministry with a view to influencing positively its conduct. He cautioned the USG not/not to view the Iranian government as a monolith or to assume the current President is firmly in control.  Afghanistan  7. (C/NF) Mushahid expressed grave concern about the \"deteriorating\" relationship between Pakistan and Afghanistan.  In his view, this could be exploited by extremists on both sides to derail the constructive engagement policy which he and others had tried to build with the Karzai government.  Mushahid called on the USG to do more to strengthen cooperation and contacts between the countries' intelligence services and political leadership, as we had done on the military side.   ISLAMABAD 00009704  003.2 OF 003   Comment  8. (C/NF) Mushahid provided a realistic look at internal PML dynamics and planning as it approaches the upcoming national elections.  His analysis of the PML's strengths and weaknesses with the electorate largely track with our own.  A strategy emphasizing President Musharraf, without question, plays to the PML's strongest campaigner and most popular figure.  Direct presidential involvement in the party's campaign remains a risky strategy, as it violates constitutional prohibitions on partisan activity by the President.  Opposition parties, as they have already done, will continue to seize on such involvement to claim an unfair electoral process, to highlight their supposed democratic credentials, and perhaps ultimately to woe the liberal middle class vote that the PML's strategy is designed to capture. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2006 11:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 009705  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2016 TAGS: CH, IN, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAK-SINO RELATIONS: \"HIGHER THAN THE HIMALAYAS, DEEPER THAN THE SEA\"  ISLAMABAD 00009705  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)  1.  (C) Summary.  At a May 23 conference celebrating 55 years of Pakistan-China relations, Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz characterized the Sino-Pak relationship as a model bilateral relationship, in which both countries are committed to peaceful co-existence, sovereign equality, and non-interference in internal affairs.  He emphasized the deep trust the two nations have for each other, and mentioned several areas of potential economic and military cooperation.  His remarks on the Indo-U.S. relationship, however, provide insight into Pakistani insecurities that the U.S. values its relationship with India more than its GWOT partner, Pakistan.   End summary.  2.  (U)  The conference, sponsored by the MFA-funded Institute of Strategic Studies in Islamabad (ISS), celebrated 55 years of Pakistan-China relations.  The guest of honor, PM Shaukat Aziz, emphasized Pakistan's deep military and economic relationship with China and noted that the bilateral relationship is not based on \"transient interests\", but is \"higher than the Himalayas, deeper than the sea.\"  He cited the recent Pakistan-China Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Good Relations as an example of a relationship characterized by peaceful co-existence, sovereign equality, and non-interference in internal affairs.  He also noted China's possible future assistance in space technology, which would give Pakistan an entry into space programs.  The February 2005 defense agreement with China will continue, he said, with the joint production of JF-17 planes and tanks, as well as research and development programs that will \"lay the groundwork for future cooperation.\"  Aziz praised growing Chinese investment in Pakistan, and thanked China for its assistance in constructing Gwadar port.  He talked of upgrading the Karakoram Highway (KKH) to improve Sino-Pak trade, and without providing any detail, touched upon the prospect of constructing an oil pipeline from Gwadar to China.  Notably absent in Aziz's comments was any mention of benefits from ongoing Sino-Pak free trade negotiations. After applauding China's assistance with the Chashma I and II nuclear reactors, Aziz emphasized that nuclear technology should be used for peaceful purposes.  In a quick aside, he pointed out that a nation has the right to produce nuclear energy peacefully.  (Note: This comment is a standard GOP talking point when discussing the current controversy over Iran's nuclear programs.  End note.)  3.  (U)  In response to a journalist's provocative question on the new \"unholy alliance\" between the U.S. and India, PM Aziz emphasized that, \"There is nothing evil in that (the U.S.-India relationship).\"  He further qualified his comment by reminding the audience that China's emergence as a player on the international arena has deepened the Indo-U.S. relationship.  He referred to Newton's third law of motion -- every action has an equal and opposite reaction -- and explained a strong Sino-Pak relationship is a natural reaction to the Indo-U.S. relationship, and ended by reminding the audience that, \"The best diplomacy is quiet diplomacy.\"  4.  (U)  Aziz was then asked what major challenges he envisioned the Pak-Sino relationship facing in the next five to ten years.  He responded that the challenge would lay in \"creating new avenues and looking for new opportunities\" for cooperation in the future.  He mused that one-sided relationships do not last forever and that only a relationship that is mutually beneficial is sustainable. Pakistan and China must promote security -- not hegemony -- he said, and the two nations must work to strengthen the UN system in order to resolve conflicts.  5.  (C)  Comment:  As the inaugural speaker, PM Aziz spoke, answered a few questions, and left the conference.  He was  ISLAMABAD 00009705  002 OF 002   not present when the discussion descended into openly anti-American rhetoric.  Yet his inflated praise of the Sino-Pak relationship --  characterized as one based on trust, entrenched regional interests, and an off-limits attitude toward the other nation's internal affairs -- offered a mirror image of common Pakistani sentiments about the U.S.-Pakistan relationship.  By emphasizing that the Pak-Sino relationship is built on a solid foundation, as opposed to \"transient\" interests, Aziz  reflected an undercurrent of Pakistani insecurity that the U.S. is not fully committed to a long-term strategic  partnership.  6.  (C)  Comment (con't): Aziz's comments aside, the conference should have been billed \"Seminar on U.S.-Indian Perfidy.\"  While the Chinese panelists focused on historical examples of Sino-Pak cooperation (Pakistani facilitation of Henry Kissinger's 1971 trip to China was one example), Pakistani speakers stressed the need for a tight Pak-Sino relationship in light of a stronger U.S.-India relationship. (Note:  Pakistani comments about this \"new\" U.S.-India relationship were so vitriolic that members of the audience repeatedly turned around in their chairs to gauge poloff's reaction.)  For example, after a dramatic reading of the India, Pakistan, and China sections from the 2006 U.S. National Security Strategy, the ISS Chairman argued that the U.S.-India nuclear deal has effectively co-opted India into endorsing \"the American strategic tenets of preemptive action, interference in internal affairs, and regime change\" -- hardly the basis for a strategic U.S.-Pakistani partnership.  End comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD7164|06ISLAMABAD8541", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2006 12:13", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 009706  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER, MARR, MOPS, EAID, ECON SUBJECT: FATA: STRATEGIES AND REDLINES  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 007164      B. ISLAMABAD 008541      C. EMAIL TO SCA/PB ON TEHREEN PLAN 05/25/06      D. EMAIL TO SCA/PB ON ODRP MEMOS 05/25/06  ISLAMABAD 00009706  001.2 OF 004   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)  1. (C//NF) Summary. The stabilization of Pakistan's Federally Administered Areas (FATA) and the acceleration of political and economic development in this troubled region is a complex task that will determine the success of USG and Government of Pakistan (GOP) counterterrorism efforts. Since 9/11, GOP has implemented a series of strategies and initiatives intended to gain greater administrative control over the region, stabilize the turbulent law and order situation, boost development and increase GWOT successes. Each successive GOP attempt has been hampered by political constraints and administrative failures, but the latest comprehensive strategy--unveiled on May 9th--indicates that GOP is placing a higher priority on successfully implementing changes in the region. End Summary  THE FATA PROBLEM--IN BRIEF -------------------------- 2. (C//NF) The Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) are Pakistan's (and the GWOT's) most geo-strategically located territories. It is also Pakistan's least developed region. FATA tribesmen are notoriously proud of their Pashtun and Islamic heritage and of their right to self-governance. This heritage led the British colonial government to leave the FATA's administration to a loosely Federally Administered Tribal area with only the veneer of representative politics, an autonomous parallel judicial system, and a reliance on tribal social and legal codes for administration. FATA tribesmen have strong tribal ties and affinities with their Pashtun brethren in Afghanistan--ties facilitated by a porous border (demarcated by the \"Durrand Line\") which only the Government of Pakistan accepts as an international border. It is also an area where an administrative and legal vacuum--created by years of government neglect, the Afghan jihad and later Afghan civil war, and an increase in the level  of strict Islamization--has been filled by Islamic community leaders, some with tribal and religious affiliations with former Taliban leaders, and other anti-Coalition militants. (Note: For more detailed information on the FATA's problems, consult Ref A).  3. (C//NF) When these factors are combined, they create the current operating environment in the FATA: --Porous borders that allow for the safe-passage and safe-haven of militants; --Rudimentary systems to promote law and order; --Agencies susceptible to control by radicalized militants and clerics; --Low levels of education, health care, and economic activity; --Agency-level administrators with little influence or power with the tribes or central government; --Separate and unequal judicial and political systems; --Tribesmen hostile to non-tribal foreigners, including Pakistanis, and to any extended Pakistani military presence; --Substantial Pak Army and Frontier Corps presence taking heavy casualties; --Deteriorating security and increasing radicalization in two agencies, which may be spreading; and --An outmoded and inept bureaucracy at the Federal and Provincial levels.  GOP's NEW FATA STRATEGY ----------------------- 4. (C//NF) The GOP has long been aware of the FATA's problems, and since 9/11, has tried many successive strategies to \"fix\" FATA. Many of these have centered around military stabilization, stop-gap administrative changes, and  ISLAMABAD 00009706  002.2 OF 004   promises for increased development funding that have not gone far. Faced with the reality of an increasingly unstable and radicalized FATA (particularly North Waziristan), significant military casualties, and the spread of law and order problems to the FATA's neighboring frontier regions, President Musharraf has become re-energized on finding a permanent solution to the FATA.  This past winter, Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz appointed former FATA Chief Secretary Sahibzada Imtiaz as the Prime Minister's Advisor on FATA, charging him with drafting a new political/administrative strategy for the FATA (ref B) . They also appointed Jehangir Tehreen to draft a strategy on jump-starting economic development and activity in the FATA (ref C). Not to be left out, the military has also re-iterated its integrated strategy (ref D).  5. (S//NF) Together, the GOP hopes to implement--in concert--a three-pronged strategy that calls for:  -- POLITICAL/ADMINISTRATIVE STRATEGY (Ref B and Septel)  A. A new, stronger NWFP Governor;  B. Centralized decision making by the NWFP Governor (and unofficially the PM and President) (Note: The GOP officially appointed a new NWFP Governor--General (Ret.) Orakzai--on May 22, in the belief that a stronger, more military-minded Governor would be more capable of getting cooperation and implementing changes (Ref D) End Note.);  C. Integrated, unified military, economic, and development decision making at the FATA Secretariat;  D. Strengthened powers for each Agency's local administrator (the Political Agent);  -- DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY (Ref C)  A. Creating a new Frontier Development Company (FDC) to oversee FATA development, and allocating $2 million for its setup;  B. Earmarking up to $600 million development funds over 5 years for development in the FATA ($150 million for 2006) in a Border Areas Development Program that is run by the FDC;  C. Asking the ADB and World Bank to draft a needs assessment for FATA by June 2006;  D. Increasing capacity to utilize allocated funds for FATA at present only 65-75 percent of funds are spent);  E. Developing a road network to benefit tribes; and  F. Drawing up a $150 million five-year \"mini-Marshall Plan\" to boost economic activity through: Reconstruction opportunity zones; agriculture and livestock management projects; 100 small dams; vocational technical institutes to train the workforce; community water schemes; increased spending on education and health; and development of the marble industry.  -- MILITARY STRATEGY  The Pakistan Army's FATA military strategy--articulated at the May 1-5 DCG meetings in Washington--aims to \"Pursue the elimination of terrorists and deny the use of Pakistani territory for miscreant activity through the articulation of military, political, and development measures\". In short, Pak mil will:  A. Seal the border with Afghanistan effectively through -troop saturation, -reinforce bases, -increased number of border check points,  ISLAMABAD 00009706  003.2 OF 004   -40-50 mobile checkpoints, listening posts, -strikes, raids and ambushes conducted by quick reaction forces and the Special Operations Task Force;  B. Conduct close cordination with ODRP, CFC-A/CJTF-76, NATO/ISAF and tri-lateral intelligence agencies through liaison and mutual visits;  C. Modify operational techniques to emphasize reliance on special forces to strike \"miscreants\" at short notice;  D. Double the size of the Frontier Corps and enhance political administration (helping to build stronger political agents, and maliks) and ensure coordination between military and political tiers;  F. Enhance integration of Frontier Corps and Khasdar forces, giving them greater role in maintaing law and order and preventing cross-border infiltrations; and  G. Contribute to economic development to reward tribes that cooperate and increase inter-tribal alliances.  CONSTRAINTS TO FURTHER, FASTER CHANGE ----------------------------------------- 6. (C//NF) The far-reaching civilian (development and political) prong of GOP's counter-terrorism/FATA normalization strategies has been hindered by domestic political attitudes, problems in administration, shortfalls in absorptive and administrative capacity, and security problems. A revolving series of NWFP Governors, Political Agents, and administrative mechanisms (FATA Development Corporation, a new FATA Secretariat) intended to improve administration have so far failed at the task of establishing better control and faster development. Clashes in personality, administrative style (i.e., an ability to get along with the Corps Commander and FC leadership), and strategy (agreement with Musharraf's grand vision) have hamstrung each successive effort.  7. (SBU) To succeed, the GOP's new administrative strategies must also overcome a myriad of constraints and political hurdles, such as:  A. ADMINISTRATIVE CONSTRAINTS -- Absorptive Capacity -- Lack of Effective Administrators -- Administrative Mindset  B. REDLINES FOR TRIBAL CHIEFS -- US/Foreign Presence for Development -- Bigger PAK Army Footprint in FATA -- Resistance to Elected Local Government -- Resistance to Political Party Activity  C. OTHER RISKS -- Tribal demand for pullout of troops -- Tribal demand for negotiation with militants -- Tribal demands to Remove Political Agents (Note: President Musharraf has said that this is not an option at this time. End note.)  8. (C//NF) The military prong of the GOP's counter-terrorism/FATA normalization strategy faces its own series of constraints--mainly the GOP's careful balance of political priorities, tenuous coalition politics, and Musharraf's need to maintain popular support for his civil-military government. President Musharraf's carefully constructed ruling coalition enjoys the tenuous support of several political parties who have made announced that they will not support a larger GOP military deployment in the FATA or US military operations in the FATA (particularly air raids and operations) without express prior coordination. Mainstream and Islamist political parties also remain  ISLAMABAD 00009706  004.2 OF 004   intolerant of civilian casualties and collateral damage, as well as the specter of targeting popular madrassas and mosques. Tribal leaders share this national intolerance of a larger footprint, but also may strongly (and militantly) resist a significant foreign/US footprint for development work, and a larger Pakistan Army presence in the FATA. Some are also likely to resist larger political changes, such as inviting political party activity into the FATA or integrating the FATA into NWFP.  COMMENT ------- 9. (C//NF) The success of the GOP's newly articulated political, military, and development strategies to stabilize and develop the FATA hinges on political will, popular support, and good management.  The availability of funding and international support are also critical.  Past FATA strategies were derailed by ineffective management and Musharraf's political balancing act, which has limited the GOP's political and military flexibility.  This time around, Musharraf, his advisors, key military officers, the FATA secretariat, and the new NWFP governor are re-energized for a  SIPDIS hard fight.  The questions are now whether the new NWFP governor can get the job done, and more importantly, whether the tribes will accept this new course of action. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD498", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2006 12:15", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 009708  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/02/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, MOPS, MARR, PK SUBJECT: FATA OPERATIONS SINCE JULY 7TH: A MIXED BAG  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 00498       B. (B) ISLAMABAD 03985      C. (C) PESHAWAR 0122      D. (D) ISLAMABAD 00498  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U) This is the second in a series of four cables assessing the GOP's progress in its crackdown on extremism.  2. (S) Summary. In the aftermath of the July 7, 2005 bombings in London, President Musharraf made a series of broad-reaching committments to tackle extremism and terrorism in Pakistan. One committment was to stabilize the troubled border regions known as the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) through an integrated strategy combining increased military operations with stronger political administration and economic development. Implementation of the overall plan has been slow. The report card for military operations is mixed, law and order in both North and South Waziristan  continue to deteriorate, despite a hefty troop presence and increased patrols in the region. The government appears to be pursuing FATA stabilization and development with new vigor since March 2006 (ref A); actual progress will require sustained political will to carry out change and better management of the strategy, both of which are in abundance at present. End summary.  Expanded Operations, Uneven Execution -------------------------------------- 3. (C) At the direction of President Musharraf and the Director General Military Operations (DGMO), the Pakistan Army and Frontier Corps expanded \"Operation Al Mizan,\" (originally launched in 2002 as an integrated political, military, and economic strategy) in the FATA in September 2005. As articulated by the DGMO, the objectives of the military operations are to \"pursue and eliminate terrorists, deny safehaven, and stabilize the region.\" To do so, the military has stationed approximately 35,000 XI Corps troops and 14,000 Frontier Corps troops in FATA. (Note:  GHQ counts the roughly 28,000 Frontier Corps troops deployed in Balochistan when they say there are 80,000 troops deployed along the border. End note.) They have also established 227 border posts, 40-50 mobile checkpoints, and stationed 5 infantry battalions of Quick Reaction Forces (QRFs) (2 in South Waziristan and 3 in North Waziristan).  4. (S) The 39 operations conducted to date have had varying degrees of success, due to uneven execution and tactical mistakes. Overall, they have led to the capture of 124 militants and the death of 324 (including 76 foreign fighters), according to a GHQ powerpoint presentation passed to the Embassy. In January 2006, Pakistani military officials admitted to US military counterparts that their tactics--repetetive cordon and search operations--were not working and that improperly integrated operations and intelligence and equipment/training shortfalls resulted in several failed operations in late 2005. Pak mil is now attempting to rectify this situation, and the DGMO has reported a few successes of late. Raids in January 2006 led to the apprehension of 13 and the death of 14 \"foreign miscreants,\" according to the DGMO. In April 2006, military spokesmen announced the probable capture or killing of two high value targets in separate operations:  --Muhsin Musa Matawai, an Egyptian national wanted for involvement in the 1998 East African Embassy bombings, captured during a raid in North Waziristan, and  --Marwan Hadid-al Suri, a Syrian national reportedly behind attacks on Pakistani forces and US forces in Eastern Afghanistan, arrested in Bajaur.  Waziristan: From Bad to Worse in 60 Days  ISLAMABAD 00009708  002 OF 002   ---------------------------------------- 5. (C) Despite unprecedented troop and patrol levels, the military's control over law and order South Waziristan remains weak.  Militants in South Waziristan--which has been unstable since troops first entered in 2004--continue to harbor foreign fighters, nurture militant clerics, and attack anyone perceived to be \"pro-government.\" Over the past year, 150 pro-government tribesmen (maliks, clerics and others) have been targeted and killed in South Waziristan (Ref A).  6. (C) Meanwhile, North Waziristan deteriorated rapidly in December 2005 and early January 2006, worsened in March 2006, and remains beyond government control today (ref B). There is a growing popular perception--reinforced by daily press reporting--that the violence has reached a point beyond the government's ability to re-establish authority (refs B and D). In December 2005 and January 2006, militant clerics--calling themselves Taliban or students of the Qu'ran--launched a \"law and order\" campaign aimed at driving out the military and imposing their own brand of security in the region (Ref C). Journalists and government officials indicate that the clerics--linked to anti-coalition militants in Afghanistan--have played up collateral civilian casualties and played on the weakness of the political administration and tribal leaders to gain public sympathy. Today, some journalists say the militant clerics have a following of 1500 able to launch daily ambushes, grenade and IED attacks on military patrols and installations in North Waziristan, relegating many troops to their barracks. Since August 2005, 56 soldiers in North Waziristan have been killed.  Comment ------- 7. (S) The absence until now of a comprehensive effort to establish strong and responsive political control, law and order, and economic benefits for cooperation mars any successes the GOP can count from Operation Al Mizan. We have pressed this point repeatedly with the Pakistani leadership, and in January, Musharraf began to acknowledge the need for a major policy overhaul in the tribal areas.  The governmetn's mid-May revelation of a new strategy for the FATA (ref A) is potentially a major step forward, but the proof will lie in its implementation. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE83898", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2006 1:36", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 009709  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, AORC, UNGA, UNGA/C-5, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO NAM/G-77 ON UN REFORM  REF: STATE 83898   1. (SBU) On May 25, Poloff delivered reftel demarche points on UN reform at the upcoming Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Ministerial-level meeting to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs's UN-I Director, Imran Siddiqui.  Having recently served at Pakistan's Permanent Mission to the UN in New York and well versed on UN reform, Mr. Siddiqui commented that as co-chair on the UN's committee for management reform the Government of Pakistan (GOP) works closely with the USG and is apprised of its views.  Siddiqui said that as co-chair the GOP understands its obligation to work towards a compromise on contentious issues; at the same time, the GOP also has a national position on UN management reform, including on specific issues on the use of information technology, financing peacekeeping operations, and human resources.  He said the GOP had tried to avoid voting for the May 8 vote that adopted the G-77 resolution, but because the divide between western countries and the G-77 was so wide, Pakistan did not have a choice.  2. (SBU) On the upcoming NAM meeting, Siddiqui thought the topic of UN reform would not come up.  This issue had been discussed before, with the NAM issuing an outcome document in which a chapter broadly touched on institutional reform at the UN.  He did not believe that delegations would be eager to touch on this issue again this time around. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD3985|06ISLAMABAD8541|06PESHAWAR122|06PESHAWAR498", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2006 1:37", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 009710  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/02/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, MOPS, MARR, PK SUBJECT: FATA OPERATIONS SINCE JULY 7TH: A MIXED BAG  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 008541      B. (B) ISLAMABAD 03985      C. (C) PESHAWAR 0122      D. (D) PESHAWAR 00498  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U) This is the second in a series of four cables assessing the GOP's progress in its crackdown on extremism.  2. (S) Summary. In the aftermath of the July 7, 2005 bombings in London, President Musharraf made a series of broad-reaching committments to tackle extremism and terrorism in Pakistan. One committment was to stabilize the troubled border regions known as the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) through an integrated strategy combining increased military operations with stronger political administration and economic development. Implementation of the overall plan has been slow. The report card for military operations is mixed, law and order in both North and South Waziristan  continue to deteriorate, despite a hefty troop presence and increased patrols in the region. The government appears to be pursuing FATA stabilization and development with new vigor since March 2006 (ref A); actual progress will require sustained political will to carry out change and better management of the strategy, both of which are in abundance at present. End summary.  Expanded Operations, Uneven Execution -------------------------------------- 3. (C) At the direction of President Musharraf and the Director General Military Operations (DGMO), the Pakistan Army and Frontier Corps expanded \"Operation Al Mizan,\" (originally launched in 2002 as an integrated political, military, and economic strategy) in the FATA in September 2005. As articulated by the DGMO, the objectives of the military operations are to \"pursue and eliminate terrorists, deny safehaven, and stabilize the region.\" To do so, the military has stationed approximately 35,000 XI Corps troops and 14,000 Frontier Corps troops in FATA. (Note:  GHQ counts the roughly 28,000 Frontier Corps troops deployed in Balochistan when they say there are 80,000 troops deployed along the border. End note.) They have also established 227 border posts, 40-50 mobile checkpoints, and stationed 5 infantry battalions of Quick Reaction Forces (QRFs) (2 in South Waziristan and 3 in North Waziristan).  4. (S) The 39 operations conducted to date have had varying degrees of success, due to uneven execution and tactical mistakes. Overall, they have led to the capture of 124 militants and the death of 324 (including 76 foreign fighters), according to a GHQ powerpoint presentation passed to the Embassy. In January 2006, Pakistani military officials admitted to US military counterparts that their tactics--repetetive cordon and search operations--were not working and that improperly integrated operations and intelligence and equipment/training shortfalls resulted in several failed operations in late 2005. Pak mil is now attempting to rectify this situation, and the DGMO has reported a few successes of late. Raids in January 2006 led to the apprehension of 13 and the death of 14 \"foreign miscreants,\" according to the DGMO. In April 2006, military spokesmen announced the probable capture or killing of two high value targets in separate operations:  --Muhsin Musa Matawai, an Egyptian national wanted for involvement in the 1998 East African Embassy bombings, captured during a raid in North Waziristan, and  --Marwan Hadid-al Suri, a Syrian national reportedly behind attacks on Pakistani forces and US forces in Eastern Afghanistan, arrested in Bajaur.  Waziristan: From Bad to Worse in 60 Days  ISLAMABAD 00009710  002 OF 002   ---------------------------------------- 5. (C) Despite unprecedented troop and patrol levels, the military's control over law and order South Waziristan remains weak.  Militants in South Waziristan--which has been unstable since troops first entered in 2004--continue to harbor foreign fighters, nurture militant clerics, and attack anyone perceived to be \"pro-government.\" Over the past year, 150 pro-government tribesmen (maliks, clerics and others) have been targeted and killed in South Waziristan (Ref A).  6. (C) Meanwhile, North Waziristan deteriorated rapidly in December 2005 and early January 2006, worsened in March 2006, and remains beyond government control today (ref B). There is a growing popular perception--reinforced by daily press reporting--that the violence has reached a point beyond the government's ability to re-establish authority (refs B and D). In December 2005 and January 2006, militant clerics--calling themselves Taliban or students of the Qu'ran--launched a \"law and order\" campaign aimed at driving out the military and imposing their own brand of security in the region (Ref C). Journalists and government officials indicate that the clerics--linked to anti-coalition militants in Afghanistan--have played up collateral civilian casualties and played on the weakness of the political administration and tribal leaders to gain public sympathy. Today, some journalists say the militant clerics have a following of 1500 able to launch daily ambushes, grenade and IED attacks on military patrols and installations in North Waziristan, relegating many troops to their barracks. Since August 2005, 56 soldiers in North Waziristan have been killed.  Comment ------- 7. (S) The absence until now of a comprehensive effort to establish strong and responsive political control, law and order, and economic benefits for cooperation mars any successes the GOP can count from Operation Al Mizan. We have pressed this point repeatedly with the Pakistani leadership, and in January, Musharraf began to acknowledge the need for a major policy overhaul in the tribal areas.  The governmetn's mid-May revelation of a new strategy for the FATA (ref A) is potentially a major step forward, but the proof will lie in its implementation. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2006 4:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 009711  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2016 TAGS: PHUM, KWMN, EAID, PGOV, SOCI, PK SUBJECT: NEW POSSIBILITIES FOR SUPPORTING WOMEN'S RIGHTS IN PAKISTAN   ISLAMABAD 00009711  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C/NF) Summary:  In an introductory call with the Ambassador on May 25, recently appointed Minister for Women's Development and Youth Affairs Sumaira Malik provided an overview of her key programmatic priorities, offering new and valuable areas for immediate and medium-term USG assistance. Malik assured the Ambassador that her top priority is repeal of discriminatory provisions of the Hudood Ordinances and further reform of honor killing legislation.  The Ministry has already launched a surreptitious campaign to generate public demand on these issues intended to gin up legislative support.  Complementing this campaign, the Ministry intends to embark shortly on awareness-raising activities designed to highlight women's rights and highlight full participation of women in Pakistani society.  Recognizing the importance of improving protection for victims of violence against women, Malik intends to expand the Ministry's 20 crisis centers to every district of the country and establish a 24-hour hotline through which victims can seek the centers' support.  Centers would be tied-in with the newly established crime cell in the Interior Ministry, which would assume responsibility for investigation of cases of violence against women. Emphasizing the need for economic empowerment of women, Malik discussed Ministry plans to establish skills centers and micro-credit schemes along the lines of the Grameen Bank to promote female entrepreneurship.  Malik was eager for USG cooperation in these priority areas, and post believes these offer viable avenues to channel both immediate funds available from DRL and future funds from USAID.  End Summary.  Repealing Discriminatory Legislation  2. (C/NF) In a May 25 meeting with the Ambassador, Minister of Women's Development and Youth Affairs Sumaira Malik emphasized the high priority she placed on prompt repeal of the remaining discriminatory legislation against women, including the Hudood Ordinances.  Malik stated that any legislation that is un-Islamic and/or that violates women's human rights had to go.  She shared that the Ministry was working in concert with private television channels to launch a below-the-radar campaign to build support both for Hudood Ordinance repeal and Honor Killing Law reform.  At the Ministry's request, private television channels had begun airing debates and news editorials on these issues to generate public awareness on and demand for the reform of this legislation.  Private television station Geo has also purchased public service announcements in local English language daily The News, highlighting the need for Hudood Ordinance repeal.  Through this public awareness and education strategy, Malik hopes to blunt the inevitable criticism that will come from Islamist quarters once the bills are introduced.  The Ministry intends to introduce the bills in the National Assembly following conclusion of the budget session that takes place in June.  Improving Victim Protection  3. (C/NF) Malik admitted that local police have a poor track record on and little experience in the proper handling of cases of violence against women and that the federal government needed to do a better job of protection of victims of such crimes.  At present, the Ministry operates 20 crisis centers that provide basic assistance and referral services for victims of violence against women.  These centers exist principally in urban areas and their efficacy varies dramatically.  Malik has obtained funds in the current budgetary cycle to expand the number of these centers and ensure that all are equipped, at a minimum, to provide free legal counseling services.  Ultimately, Malik intends to establish a crisis center in each district, providing a full range of victim counseling and support services.   ISLAMABAD 00009711  002.2 OF 003   4. (C/NF) As a first step to improving victim access to these centers, the Ministry is launching a 24-hour helpline the week of May 29.  This will connect victims directly to center staff who can provide immediate assistance in dealing with local law enforcement and obtaining protection.  Malik is working with the Interior Ministry to have helpline staff linked to the newly established crime cell.  Once this happens, the crime cell would assume responsibility for violence against women cases from local police services. Malik argued this would ensure better handling of such cases by trained police personnel and would prevent local influentials (feudal landlords, tribal chiefs, jirgas) from interfering in the investigation.  Economic Empowerment  5. (C/NF) Arguing that the GOP had done a great deal for the political empowerment of women (i.e., increased representation in legislative bodies at all levels), the next critical step is the economic empowerment of women.  As a first step, Malik highlighted that in the upcoming budget she had secured funds to provide development money to local women councillors.  This will enable them to launch appropriate women's development schemes in their districts.  In addition, the Ministry is keen to examine possible federal support, including the establishment of skills training centers and micro-credit schemes similar to the Grameen Bank.  In this way, female entrepreneurship could be promoted.  Malik also expressed strong support for women's quotas.  Ten percent of government civil service jobs have recently been set aside for women, and the Ministry is now pressing the private sector to follow suit.  Publicizing female entrepreneurs will help convince other women that they too can participate actively in the economic/business sectors.  Public Relations  6. (C/NF) Malik was highly critical of her predecessors' moribund public relations strategy that she claimed had failed to highlight the government's positive steps towards women's empowerment, lacked a strong public education message, and allowed an inaccurate picture of the country to be portrayed in the western media.  Malik argued that a more proactive strategy could address these deficiencies.  After the conclusion of the budget debate in June, Malik intends to launch a strategy that would include mass education for women (and men) about women's rights and opportunities through media and direct public meetings.  As part of the strategy, the Ministry would highlight the achievements of successful women in the business, political, and academic fields and encourage others to follow in their footsteps.  The Ambassador also encouraged Malik to highlight victims of abuse as part of the strategy in order to educate others about their experiences.  Malik requested USG assistance in trying to change the negative image about women's rights in Pakistan in the western media.  Ambassador noted that positive attention by the GOP in the area's discussed previously would no doubt receive substantial western media coverage.  Comment  7. (C/NF) Post feels strongly that the best way to promote women's rights in Pakistan is through direct, continuous engagement with the government.  In the new Women's Development Minister, we have a constructive counterpart who has both a vision and concrete plans that can help to improve women's human rights in this country.  Providing assistance to one or more of the various initiatives that she has identified as her priorities would have a significant impact.  We urge that immediate resources identified by DRL and medium-term resources projected by USAID should be utilized in support of the government's overall initiatives, rather  ISLAMABAD 00009711  003.2 OF 003   than one-off projects through NGOs or individuals.  This would help to ensure sustainability, give us greater leverage over government policies in this area, encourage business participation in the proposed economic development projects, and allow us to multiply our limited resources with counterpart funding from the GOP.  As an initial focus of our program, we would recommend that DRL funds be used to support the Ministry in the upgrade of a select number of women's crisis centers to provide full counseling and assistance services, as well as to establish a credible working relationship between the centers and the Ministry of Interior's crime cell.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2006 5:24", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 009712  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2016 TAGS: MARR, MCAP, MOPS, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK MIL SUPPORT IN BALOCHISTAN FOR OPERATION MOUNTAIN THRUST  REF: GASTRIGHT-CROCKER EMAIL 23 MAY 06  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  Per SCA request (ref A), post offers this summary of Pakistani military operations in Balochistan in support of CFC-A Operation Mountain Thrust.  2.  (S)  On May 20, Coalition Joint Task Force (CJTF-76) and the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) representatives met with Pakistan GHQ Military Operations (MO) Directorate and 12th Corps to coordinate Coalition and Pak Mil operations for Operation Mountain Thrust.  Pak Mil said it would assign a regular Army brigade and 15 Baloch Frontier Corps (BFC) wings, as well as establish additional border posts to be staffed jointly by regular Army and (BFC) troops.  Pak Mil will dedicate artillery, two battalion-size Quick Reaction Forces (QRF) and the BFC will request dedicated rotary wing aviation assets from the Ministry of Interior.  Pak Mil's conceives a series of static posts, mobile checkpoints and QRFs divided into 6 sectors running from Zabol to Nimroz border area.  U.S. and Pak Mil agreed that all the commanders involved in Operation Mountain Thrust will attend the southern Tripartite Commission (TPC) Border Security Sub-Committee Meeting on May 29, at which a schedule of flag meetings to coordinate details of the operation will be discussed.  3.  (S)  During the May 20 meeting, Pak Mil briefed that they have named their support Operation Nagehban (Guardian).  As Pak Mil's analysis of 3 key crossing areas matches CJTF-76s analysis, these will be the focal points for Pak Mil operations:  Q.D.K Sector  (opposite Zabol/ Maruf District)-- 1st key crossing site: 3 x FC Wings 31 x Posts in place 7 x new posts to be established 10 x QRFs to be established  BOLAN SECTOR:  (Between Maruf and Spin Buldak) 2 x wings 13 x posts 6 x QRFs and 10 x posts to be established 1 x Regular Army Inf Battalion (minus 2 x Companies) to be added  PISHIN SECTOR (Spin Buldak)-- 2nd key crossing site 4 x wings 74 x posts 12 x QRFs to be established 1 x Regular Army Inf Battalion to be added  CHAGAI SECTOR:  (Between Spin Buldak and Bara Cha) 3 x wings 28 x posts 3 x QRFs and 11 x posts to be established  DALBANDIN SECTOR  (Opposite Bara Cha)-- 3rd key crossing site 1 x wing 1 x new wing to be established 13 x posts (with 12 more to be established) 4 x QRFs to be established  KHARAN SECTOR:  (moves western part of Helmand to Nirmroz) 4 x wings  (only 1 x wing on AFG border) 35 x posts 2 x QRFs to be established  4.  (S)  Comment:  As with the nine other CJTF-76/Pak Mil coordinated operations, Pak Mil will not/not publicly acknowledge that they are engaged in this operation.  ODRP  ISLAMABAD 00009712  002 OF 002   and CJTF-76 will continue coordination and liaison with 12th Corps and Pak Mil GHQ throughout this operation. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2006 11:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 009772  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2016 TAGS: MARR, MASS, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: UK FACILITATES TRANSIT OF DANISH CARGO  REF: ENGELKEN-GRENCIK EMAIL 17 MAY 06  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  In response to inquiries via State and Defense Department channels (Reftel), post has confirmed through the British High Commmision (BHC) and Danish Defense Command Representatives that Danish military cargo transiting Pakistan en route to Afghanistan was successfully offloaded at Karachi on 22 May.  The Danes discharged 33 flat racks of vehicles, 2 empty flat racks, and 247 containers.  The first truck convoy transporting the cargo to the Pak-Afghan border en route to Kandahar departed Karachi just after midnight on Thursday, May 25 via commercial transporter \"Secure Packers\"; the BHC estimates that the convoy will reach the border crossing at Chaman in four or five days.  The BHC estimates that the convoys transporting the Danish cargo will depart Karachi over the next six days.  A three-member Danish team will remain in Karachi to oversee the cargo until the last transport convoy reaches Afghanistan.  2. (C)  As this cargo will support Danish troops assigned to the British battle group in Helmand Province, Afghanistan, the BHC agreed to facilitate the transit after the Pakistani Embassy in Copenhagen denied a Danish request for a National Logistics Cell exemption authorizing transport via a private commercial carrier.  (Note:  The request had been forwarded through the Pakistani Embassy as the Danish Embassy in Islamabad had been closed following violent anti-cartoon demonstrations in February 2006.  End note)  Working in coordination with post's Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) and the Netherlands Defense Attache, the BHC served as a liaison between the Danes and the GOP bureaucracy. After a recent meeting attended by visiting members of the Danish Defense Command and the BHC with Pakistani's Joint Staff HQ and Ministry of Defense, the BHC stressed that failure to issue a No Objection Certificate (NOC) to the Danes permitting the use of the commercial carrier would lead to unacceptable delays, undermining ISAF's deployment in Helmand and endangering the lives of British and  Danish troops.  The Danes received the NOC midday May 25; the first transport convoy departed Karachi approximately twelve hours later.  3. (C)  Comment:  The BHC's willingness to facilitate the transit of this shipment offers an excellent example of ISAF cooperation.  Thanks to its intervention, the Danish cargo cleared the port and was on the road according to the original deployment timeline.          CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE77262", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/30/2006 5:14", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 009875  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, AORC, ASEC, ENRG, KNNP, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR SANDIA NATIONAL LABORATORY STAFF JOSE R. RODRIGUEZ AND JAMES W. PURVIS  REF: STATE 77262  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Sandia National Laboratories' staff Jose R. Rodriguez and James W. Purvis from June 10 to 16.  The purpose of the visit is to participate in an IAEA training course in Islamabad. Post understands that IAEA's local partner, the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority, will arrange for travelers' accomodations at the Marriott Hotel and will provide transportation to/from course events each day.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Theresa Grencik. She can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000 Office: 92-51-208-2294 Cell: 92 300 856 4708 Email:  grencikta@state.gov  3.  An Embassy car and driver and expediter will meet visitors upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad. Transportation will be provided to the airport on the day of departure.  Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  4.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  5. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  6.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  7.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  8.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security  programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  9.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  10.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  11. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not  available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9472|06ISLAMABAD9704", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/30/2006 8:10", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 009890  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/26/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PARTIES PREPARE THEIR ELECTORAL STRATEGIES  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 9704      B. (B) ISLAMABAD 9472  ISLAMABAD 00009890  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d.  1. (S/NF) Summary: Electoral strategies for Pakistan's major parties are coalescing in advance of the likely late 2007/early 2008 national and provincial elections.  At this stage, most parties, save the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N), have adopted a go-it-alone strategy.  The ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML), while leaving the door open to seat adjustments and post-electoral coalitions, appears to be ruling out any form of pre-election agreement with other parties, including its current coalition partners.  While the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) has made much of reconciliation with the PML-N through the Charter for Democracy, its in-country leaders have consistently ruled out electoral alliances with that party and continue to stall on any possible agreement with the PML.  We understand from British contacts that perceptions of declining international support for Musharraf may be influencing exiled PPP leader Benazir Bhutto's decision to go-slow on a pre-electoral overture to the PML.  Benazir is basing this erroneous view largely on recent USG statements critical of Musharraf's counter-terrorism performance, which she interprets as the USG dumping Musharraf in her favor.  Senior PML officials share a similar interpretation.  This has the potential to derail efforts at pre-electoral rapprochement between the parties and free and fair elections.  End Summary.  Pakistan Muslim League  2. (S/NF) Senior PML officials have reiterated to post over the last week that the party has taken a strategic decision to contest the next elections without any alliances.  The party President and Secretary General (refs) have specifically ruled out any pre-electoral deal with the PPP. Seat adjustments with the PPP, JUI-F, and ANP in select districts (principally in NWFP and Balochistan) are under consideration.  Broader alliances with members of the ruling coalition, the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM), Pakistan Muslim League-Functional (PML-F), PPP-Sherpao, and PPP-Patriots, are reportedly not.  PML leaders expect the MQM and PML-F to contest independently in Sindh but to rejoin any post-election PML-led alliance.  Seat adjustments with PPP-Sherpao in NWFP are under consideration.  PML leaders expect that if PPP-Patriots refuse to join the PML fold, they stand little chance of reelection.  Pakistan People's Party  3. (S/NF) The in-country leadership of the PPP also appears to be adopting a unilateral election strategy -- its public embrace of the Charter for Democracy notwithstanding.  In private discussions over the last several months, rhetoric from senior leaders, including Chairman Makhdoom Amin Fahim, has subtly shifted from pleas for USG assistance in brokering an electoral understanding with the PML to requests simply for a level playing field on which the party can challenge Musharraf.  Unlike their PML counterparts, PPP leaders are not basing their strategy on realistic calculations of electoral potential.  Rather, they are relying on a vague, and possibly inaccurate, perception of Musharraf's declining domestic support.  British diplomats suggest that this PPP analysis has been reinforced by Benazir Bhutto's belief that USG support for Musharraf has declined, obviating any need for her to cut a deal. In such a scenario, PPP leaders believe that the PML vote bank will collapse, ensuring them an easy victory over their ostensible ally the weaker PML-N -- a party with which PPP leaders have made clear they have no intention of governing.  Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz   ISLAMABAD 00009890  002.2 OF 003   4. (S/NF) The PML-N recognizes that it enters the next elections in a weak position with many of its members having defected to the PML and its traditional supporters divided. Its leaders are wagering the party's future on the Charter for Democracy and wide-ranging seat adjustments with the PPP.  The party hopes to form a de facto anti-Musharraf coalition that will give it access to the PPP's broader support base and prevent a head-to-head contest with its far stronger traditional rival.  Party leaders believe that if Nawaz Sharif can burnish his \"democratic\" credentials, the PML-N can capture enough of the anti-military, urban, middle-class vote in Punjab to position itself as the preeminent center-right party for future contests.  Like the PPP, the PML-N strategy presumes a weakening Musharraf and international support.  In recent meetings PML-N leaders including Chairman Raja Zafar-ul-Haq have sought USG support for a PPP-PML-N electoral understanding against Musharraf. In this vein, the PML-N leaders have promised no coalition with the JI, cited the anti-American sentiments of some PPP leaders, and denigrated any PML role in future politics.  Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal  5. (S/NF) The MMA is already a coalition divided with its strongest two parties pursuing independent and contradictory electoral strategies.  The JI has made clear its desire to form a broad anti-Musharraf coalition with the PPP and PML-N to \"force\" the President from office.  JI believes that it can position itself at the center of any such campaign, thereby building its support base and placing future PPP and PML-N governments in its debt.  Unlike JI, which believes it can capture an increased share of power, the JUI-F is solely interested in keeping the power it has gained in NWFP and Balochistan.  PML, PPP, and PML-N leaders have all reported Fazl-ur-Rehman's willingness to work with the election winner for an acceptable price.  With the two main parties pursuing their own competing agendas, the relevance of the MMA as a coalition will likely continue to fade, even if formally retained for public relations reasons.  The Nationalists  6. (S/NF) The smaller nationalist parties (save the Baloch which are entirely consumed with provincial strife) seem to be positioning themselves for a hung parliament.  Their strategies focus on building working relationships with all three main parties -- PML, PPP, and PML-N -- enabling them to enter coalition with whosoever obtains a plurality.  The ANP has proven most adept so far at this strategy.  While still retaining close ties with the PML-N and PPP through the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy, ANP leader Asfandyar Wali Khan has recently repaired relations with Musharraf, opening possible avenues for cooperation.  All three main parties now see the ANP as a possible partner for seat adjustments and post-electoral coalitions.  The MQM would like to be in a similar position.  Deputy Convenor Farooq Sattar has repeatedly stressed that the MQM will contest the upcoming elections independently and not/not with the PML.  Sattar has attempted to adopt an independent line from the GOP on key issues like provincial autonomy and unsuccessfully to court the PML-N and PPP.  Indeed, MQM has sought USG assistance in repairing its relations with these parties.  The International Role  7. (S/NF) The potential role of the international community, particularly the United States, figures prominently in parties' calculations.  There is an increasing perception among opposition politicians that the USG has decided to dump Musharraf in favor of one of the former civilian prime ministers.  While much of this reflects wishful thinking in light of USG commitments to free and fair elections, recent statements critical of Musharraf's counterterrorism efforts  ISLAMABAD 00009890  003.2 OF 003   coupled with Pakistan sensitivities to the U.S. civil nuclear initiative have increased this view.  Conversations with in-country leaders of both parties and British reporting on recent conversations with Benazir Bhutto suggest that this perception is a large factor in refusals to conclude a deal with Musharraf.  More troubling still are indications that senior PML officials have reached a similar conclusion.  In a recent conversation with PML Secretary General Mushahid Hussain, poloffs were informed of concern within the PML that the USG was abandoning Musharraf in favor of Benazir Bhutto. He expressed relief when assured that this was not the case and that the USG interest was in promoting fair elections, not endorsing any individual or party.  Comment  8. (S/NF) To a degree it appears that parties are calculating election strategies on the basis of inaccurately perceived intentions of the international community.  While we will continue to dispel actively any suggestion of declining USG support for the government or U.S. endorsement of Bhutto, we must remember that all parties read more into their interpretations of our behavior than our direct denials on these matters.  In this vein, any public suggestion of USG dissatisfaction with Musharraf's role in the GWOT, an area in which we have previously offered visible praise, will be taken as a withdrawal of overall support.  This will stymie GOP efforts to conclude an understanding with like-minded parties (PPP and ANP) prior to the election -- probably the best formula for a moderate, stable government after 2007. In a worst-case scenario, if Musharraf feels the international community has abandoned him, he may withdraw his endorsement of a free and fair election and allow massive rigging circa 2002.  This would not only be a massive set-back for democratization, but would also deny Musharraf the legitimacy and popular mandate his future government needs to pursue aggressively controversial counter-terrorism programs.  End Comment CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9033|06ISLAMABAD9499", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/30/2006 9:05", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 009892  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D COPY -- CORRECTING TEXT  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2016 TAGS: IR, KNNP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF TELLS IRAN \"STOP ENRICHMENT NOW\"  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 9499      B. ISLAMABAD 9033  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S)  Over the Memorial Day weekend, Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri offer a read out of the May 26 meeting between President Musharraf and Iranian First Vice President Davoudi (ref A).  According to Kasuri, Musharraf told the visitors that Iran should stop all efforts to enrich uranium now, adding that Tehran' current policy was making life difficult for its neighbor, Pakistan. After offering a long justification of Iran's right to pursue a civilian nuclear energy program in the call on Musharraf, Davoudi privately told Kasuri that Iran is considering all options on the issue.  Kasuri interpreted this to mean that the notion of cessation remains on the table.  Kasuri also told the Ambassador that the Iranians' discussions here, as in the earlier talks in Bali (ref B), left him with the impression that Iran is eager to hold direct talks with the U.S. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/30/2006 10:54", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 009911  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KNNP, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: GOP RESPONSE TO PROPOSED EXBS PROGRAMMING  REF: COLLINS - GRENCIK EMAIL 22 MAY 06  1.  (U)  Post appreciates the comprehensive programming that ISN/ECC has laid out for Pakistan between July 2006 nd January 2007 (ref A).  The Government of Pakistan (GOP), through the MFA Disarmament Cell, has indicated that it wishes to participate in all of the proposed programs and is committed to working with poloff on identifying appropriate GOP personnel for each event.  2.  (U)  On 29 May, MFA - Disarmament Cell delivered to poloff a list of fifteen (15) Pakistani candidates to participate in the Advanced Regulatory Workshop in London in July 2006.  The delegation includes:  MFA --- Mr. Khalilullah Qazi, Director General - Disarmament Mr. Imran Haider, Deputy Director - Disarmament  Strategic Plans Division ------------------------ COL. M. Shurshid Khan LTC Hamid Farooq LTC (ret'd) Zawar Haider Abidi MAJ (ret'd) Muhammad Riaz  Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission --------------------------------- Mr. Zubair Sadiq Mr. Sajjad Malik Mr. Nawaz Qureshi Mr. Muhammad Khaliq Mr. Muhammad Usman  Central Board of Revenue ------------------------ Mr. Zulfiqar Kazmi, Chief - Customs Dr. Zulfiqar Malik, Additional Collector (Exports)  Ministry of Commerce -------------------- Mr. Jamshid Khan, Joint Secretary (FT III) Mr. Niaz Muhammad Khan, Section Officer (Americas)  3.  (U)  Muhammad Kamran, MFA - Disarmament Cell, asked poloff to confirm that expenses related to this program, as well as the other EXBS programs scheduled between July 2006 and January 2007, will be funded by the USG, as this was a matter of concern to the participating GOP agencies.  MFA again requested that the London seminar be scheduled in the latter half of July.  With regard to other programs, Kamran has advised relevant GOP agencies that nominations for the Interdiction Training and Equipment programs in South Carolina (November 2006) and Texas (December 2006)  must be submitted before the end of June 2006, to allow sufficient time for the participants to apply for U.S. visas.  4.  (SBU) Comment: After a lull in activity following extended period of personnel transition in the Disarmament Cell, post is pleased to report a re-energized GOP commitment to export control capacity.  Post understands that the Disarmament Cell has been instructed by senior MFA officials to pursue EXBS cooperation with the U.S.; we believe that the Disarmament Cell will be able to facilitate GOP participation in the events currently scheduled by ISN/ECC.  Post looks forward to working with ISN/ECC on ensuring that the current schedule of programs is a success.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/31/2006 7:02", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 009964  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/24/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PROGRESS TOWARDS DEMOCRACY  REF: 05 ISLAMABAD 1067  ISLAMABAD 00009964  001.9 OF 003   Classified By: DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C/NF) Summary: The upcoming national and provincial elections will be an important bellwether on progress towards democratization in Pakistan.  However, free and fair elections must be supported by long-term systemic changes that are necessary to institute good governance and firm civilian control over the military.  As we continue to track progress towards elections, it will be important to assess progress on institution building and transitional arrangements -- both of which remain at relatively early levels of development.  This cable establishes a baseline assessment of progress on transitional arrangements and institutional development in four key sectors -- legislatures, local governments, political parties, courts, and the bureaucracy.  USG programs operating in these areas provide opportunities to support the long-term institutional change needed to allow a free and fair election in 2007 to contribute substantively to long-term democratization.  End Summary  Ensuring a Smooth Transition  2. (C/NF) Given Pakistan's poor record on successful transitions from military rule to sustainable civilian democracy, successful management of transitional arrangements will be a critical component of ensuring success in the current cycle.  A return to the corrupt, inept, and anti-democratic civilian regimes of the 1990s will do little to advance the cause of democracy in Pakistan.  Similarly, strained relations between the military and the political classes -- the friction behind many of the country's military takeovers -- must be systematically addressed and managed. Post continues to believe that President Musharraf has the vision, leadership skills, and establishment support to address both issues in a meaningful fashion.  As no party is likely to obtain an outright majority in the upcoming national elections, a coalition will be necessary to govern. In a best-case scenario, Musharraf would be able to expand his political support base to include mainstream political forces, mainly the PPP, in the aftermath of genuinely free and fair elections in 2007.  Such a scenario would provide Musharraf a popular mandate to enable a phased transition of power over the ensuing five years from what will be viewed as a military presidency (even if Musharraf removes his uniform) to a civilian prime ministership.  Such a phased transition should allow for the development of civilian democratic institutions and creation of an institutionalized civil-military dispute resolution mechanism through either the existing National Security Council or the opposition's proposed Defense Consultative Committee.  3. (S/NF) This managed transitional approach, however, will require pre-election understandings between the GOP and the PPP.  A dialogue has been ongoing between leaders on both sides since at least 2004, but with little in the way of concrete progress.  Government overtures to PPP leader-in-exile Benazir Bhutto in early 2006 have foundered over intractable demands on both sides.  Post is concerned that positions have hardened in the last few weeks, due to an erroneous perception that the USG (and possibly the British) has decided to back Benazir Bhutto over President Musharraf as head of a post-election government.  While we have repeatedly denied any truth to such rumors, the PPP seems prepared to gamble on this possibility rather than negotiate further.  Absent PPP backing, Musharraf will face an increasingly complex, and perhaps impossible task, in trying to manage the transition.  Legislative Strengthening  4. (C/NF) Recent international literature has highlighted the  ISLAMABAD 00009964  002.4 OF 003   linkage between strong parliaments and successful emergence of democratic rule.  By this measure, Pakistan falls far behind the democratic curve.  The national and the four provincial assemblies do not yet play a meaningful role in scrutiny of executive action, independent legislation, or national conflict resolution.  While there have been notable improvements in the functioning of a handful of committees and of independent oversight work by some legislators, these have been almost exclusively concentrated at the national level and appear to be the result of increased confidence on the part of a limited number of legislators as opposed to systemic changes.  Post is concerned that as these gains lack institutional support, they will quickly evaporate following the next election.  Institutionalizing changes through building effective committee processes, establishing an ongoing training center for parliamentarians, and establishing a viable research center to assist both committees and individual members with their oversight responsibilities remain the focus of our assistance in this area.  Reforms allowing members to deliver constituent services in a transparent, corruption-free method that does not impede national development planning will also be required.  Local Governance  5. (C/NF) For most Pakistanis, national and provincial governments remain largely irrelevant.  This is in sharp contrast to local governments, which have responsibility for most governmental services ranging from infrastructure to social services.  Musharraf's decision in 2000 to replace bureaucratic administrators with elected local governments represented a critical break with undemocratic local government traditions.  It also, however, meant a steep learning curve for newly elected members of the highly complex three-tier system that was implemented.  Performance during the first term that ended in 2005 varied radically.  A handful of elected governments were able to improve on the performance of their bureaucratic predecessors, due to the personal initiative and leadership of senior officials.  The remainder struggled, unable to navigate a complex governance system, hostile provincial governments and local elites, and parallel institutions that inserted the federal government in local matters.  As a result over half of incumbents were not reelected in 2005.  The National Reconstruction Bureau has belatedly realized that its training and assistance methodologies were badly outdated.  It has, therefore, approved USAID's \"Districts that Work\" program that will assist a select number of districts to better manage existing resources and deliver services to constituents.  Lessons learned and methods developed under this program can be replicated in other districts across Pakistan.  Political Parties  6. (C/NF) The mainstream political parties focus almost exclusively on personalities rather than programs or ideology.  None have strong internal democratic traditions nor regular, competitive elections for leadership at any level.  Training of new leaders is practically non-existent, and decision-making is generally highly centralized.  Most parties have not developed strong grass-roots support bases, focusing instead on concluding agreements with feudal landlords and tribal chiefs, who are then supposed to deliver their supporters on election day.  While certain of these trends, particularly the centralization of decision-making authority, have been exacerbated in recent years, there are some positive indicators.  NDI programs have increased the parties' emphasis on leadership training and opened the debate on democratic structures.  The three largest parties (PPP, PML, and PML-N) have all begun competitive elections for local offices within the party.  Indeed, the PML claims that its senior office-bearers will face similar scrutiny -- although with President Musharraf having already endorsed the  ISLAMABAD 00009964  003.4 OF 003   reelection of the current slate of senior leaders, these contests will likely be meaningless.  In the run-up to the 2007 elections, post will continue to work through NDI to provide parties with support necessary to improve candidate-selection methodology, develop issue-based platforms, and improve connectivity with grass-roots voters.  Courts  7. (S/NF) The Pakistani court system is broken.  Its ability to deliver justice to the average citizen is badly impeded. Corruption and elite influence on the lower courts are rampant.  Appellate tribunals are more independent from financial pressure, but their decisions in high-profile political cases are frequently influenced by the executive. While President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz have both expressed a desire to improve the court system, there seems to be no systematic plan for doing so.  Indeed, the Asian Development Bank project has been unable to obtain implementation of many of the recommended policy changes from its \"Access to Justice\" program.  In its most recent periodic briefing to program stakeholders, the Bank was able to show marked improvement in only one of its numerous progress indicators -- the speed with which a case is decided by the court system.  Absent a significant improvement in the quality and independence of judicial decisionmaking, post does not consider rapidity an indicator of progress.  Reform of the judiciary will require a serious high-level commitment by the GOP.  Post recommends continued engagement with the GOP on this issue but minimal funding until such time as a genuine commitment is demonstrated.  Meaningful reforms to be enacted by a future coalition government should include parliamentary confirmation of judicial nominees for appellate courts and establishment of an independent entity to police corruption within the judiciary.  Bureaucracy  8. (C/NF) The senior-levels of the Pakistani bureaucracy are an extension of the feudal and tribal elites that dominate the political classes, often coming from the same families. These senior-level elites see themselves as an independent center of power in the Pakistani political structure, refusing to subordinate themselves to the government of the day, be it civilian or military, and leading to continuous behind-the-scenes battles for control.  There are numerous instances of Federal Secretaries blocking initiatives approved at the political level through bureaucratic means. While most of the senior levels of the bureaucracy hold the minimum qualifications for their appointments, the same cannot be said for their lower level counterparts, many of whom obtained their job through political patronage. Corruption at this level of the bureaucracy is rampant, and work performance is poor.  Even the most committed senior-level bureaucrats often find that they lack the support structures necessary to carry out their jobs effectively.  Radical reform of the bureaucracy based on a merit system is essential.  Comment  9. (C/NF) Despite the serious impediments that still remain in the path of democratization, post is optimistic. President Musharraf has demonstrated a willingness to move forward with reforms in many of the sectors that we have identified, and there is a broadbased and growing coalition of support for change in the legislatures and within political parties among mid-level politicians.  With continued engagement and support, these groups can be aided in bringing about meaningful and long-term change.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/31/2006 11:31", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 009997  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D COPY -- CHANGE IN TEXT  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK, AF SUBJECT: AFGANISTAN COUNTRY CLEARANCE REQUEST  1.  Embassy Islamabad requests country clearance for the following to attend meetings with Embassy Kabul counterparts June 6- June 7:             1. Ambassador Ryan Crocker             2. Tim Wilder, POL             3. Col. Chris Allen, ODRP             4. Chris DeAngelis, ECON             5. Heather Lingred, RAO             6. Hollis Summers, REF             8. Sherry Carlin, USAID             9. Lisa Johnson, NAS             10. Col. Charles Robinson, DAO             11. Bill Dyer, DEA             12. Mohammed Motiwala, Staff Aide  Ambassador Crocker, Tim Wilder, Col. Chris Allen, Lisa Johnson, Heather Lingred and Chris DeAngelis have TS/SCI clearance.  The remaining members of the delegation have a TS clearance.  2. Refugee Coordinator Hollis Summers requests country clearance until June 12.  He plans to accompany Kabul Refugee Coordinator Pascoe on visits to refugee programs from June 8 - June 12. He will return back to Islamabad via UNHAS.  3.    The delegation is scheduled to fly mil air with the following itinerary: June 06  Dep Islamabad at 1500; arrive Kabul at 1530. June 06  Dep Kabul at 1700; arrive Islamabad at 1830.  4.  Please provide transportation from/to the airport and lodging.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE87682", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/1/2006 10:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010142  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2016 TAGS: IR, KNNP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: GOP WELCOMES U.S. STATEMENT ON IRAN  REF: A. STATE 87682       B. ISLAMABAD 9892      C. ISLAMABAD 9499      D. ISLAMABAD 9033  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On the evening of May 31, the Ambassador conveyed key points on the Secretary Rice's announcement that the U.S. will to join the EU-3 in direct talks with Iran, if Tehran first verifiably stops its enrichment and reprocessing program, to Foreign Minister Kasuri (Ref A). The Foreign Minister welcomed the news and promised to convey it immediately to President Musharraf.  The Ambassador noted that the Foreign Minister had recently repeated the GOP impression that Tehran keenly wanted to open a dialogue with Washington.  Now that the Secretary has opened the door to full participation in the EU-3's dialogue with Iran (Ref B, C, D), the Ambassador continued, the U.S. expects Pakistan to vigorously support the U.S. action.  FM Kasuri agreed, saying that he would ensure that the MFA issued a statement of support immediately.  2.  (C)  The Foreign Minister called the Ambassador at 2300 local time to confirm that he had advised President Musharraf of the Secretary's announcement and that the MFA had issued a statement of support (full text below).  3.  (U)  Text of MFA press release:  (Begin text.)  P.R. No. 203/2006  Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Office of the Spokesperson)  Press Release  When asked to comment, a Spokesperson of the Foreign Office said, \"The statement by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice indicating willingness of the United States to talk to Iran along with the EU-3 is a positive development that we hope would lead to reduction of tensions and negotiations for a diplomatic solution of the Iranian nuclear issue.  Pakistan has always supported a diplomatic solution of this problem and opposed resort to the use of force.  We have emphasized that all parties must abide by their international obligations and no effort should be spared to find a negotiated solution.  While we are firmly against nuclear proliferation, we support Iran's right to develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes under IAEA safeguards.\"  Islamabad May 31, 2006  (End text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE86651", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/2/2006 11:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010237  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, UNGA, KHIV SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: UNGA AIDS DECLARATION  REF: STATE 86651  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On May 1, 2006, poloff delivered reftel points to MFA (UN - II) Director Jamil Ahmed.  The next morning, after he had had an opportunity to consult with the Pakistani UN Mission, Ahmed telephoned poloff to reply to reftel point expressing disappointment in Pakistan's support for the Rio Group's effort to introduce proposals on trade and intellectual property rights into the Declaration.  Ahmed denied that Pakistan had been an active supporter of this effort; in his words, Pakistan simply \"aligned itself with other developing countries.\"  Poloff remarked that this alignment nonetheless translated into unhelpful and unnecessary proposals that detract from the primary purpose of the Declaration.  Aside from the Rio Group action, Ahmed said that Pakistan would also like the Declaration to remain within the framework of the 2001 documents.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD10142", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/2/2006 12:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010261  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, IR, KNNP SUBJECT: FM KASURI TELLS IRAN \"TAKE THE OFFER\"  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 10142       B. STATE 87686  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C)  On June 2, Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri told the Ambassador that he had telephoned Iranian Foreign Minister Muttaki the previous day to share Pakistan's assessment that Secretary Rice's May 31 statement on Iran (Ref B) was a  SIPDIS positive shift in U.S. policy.  Kasuri told Muttaki that, in his view, the Secretary's statement reflected consideration by the U.S. of messages from Washington's European allies and from Muslim countries like Pakistan.    The U.S. has met long-standing the Iranian request for direct dialogue, Kasuri continued; as a neighbor, Pakistan strongly advised Iran to seize this new opportunity.  2.  (C)  Foreign Minister Muttaki thanked Kasuri for his call, but said that the Secretary Rice had spoken in a very negative manner regarding Iran and the country's leadership. This was the same old rhetoric, with nothing new from Washington except for the conditioned offer of direct talks. Iran will not accept these preconditions, Muttaki said, citing the recent NAM statement that there should be no preconditions for negotiations.  If the U.S. wants to talk, Muttaki concluded, that's fine -- but if it insists on preconditions, Iran will have to engage the international community diplomatically.  (Note:  Kasuri offered that he wasn't sure what Muttaki meant by this final remark.  End note.)  3.  (C)  Kasuri responded by noting that Iran had sent the U.S. a 17-page public letter full of negative rhetoric.  It was clear, Kasuri said, that this letter was intended to speak to Tehran's domestic constituency; it is just as clear that Secretary Rice was speaking to Washington's.   Kasuri again urged Iran to announce an immediate suspension of its enrichment program in order to give dialogue a chance.  4.  (C)  Muttaki thanked Kasuri again for calling, saying that Iran would take Pakistan's advice into account as it considers the U.S. offer.  5.  (C)   Comment:  Following his read-out of the Muttaki conversation, Kasuri observed that U.S. media analysts are skeptical that the Secretary's statement actually represents an important policy shift, suggesting that the U.S. offer to join the EU's direct talks may be nothing more than a ploy to shift the burden to Tehran.  The Ambassador replied that the media is notoriously cynical.   Kasuri may be mildly worried that he has gone out on a limb by endorsing the Secretary's statement so vigorously. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06KABUL2524", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/5/2006 10:52", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010429  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/05/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK, AF SUBJECT: KABUL DEMONSTRATIONS CONTINUE TO GENERATE PRESS IN PAKISTAN  REF: KABUL 2524  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  Pakistani papers continue to give attention to last week's demonstrations in Kabul, with most characterizing the precipitating incident as a sign of American arrogance and the resulting demonstrations as a bellwether of increasing Afghan impatience with the American presence.  The high point of negative coverage came on May 31, when virtually all papers -- both English and Urdu and representing every political persuasion -- included extensive editorial coverage of the incident. Many papers have continued to offer assessments through the weekend.  A representative sample of coverage follows:  -- Editorial in Islamabad-based Urdu daily, \"Ausaf,\" 5/31: \"Most of the Afghans hate Americans, and this incident has exposed the true face of the forerunner of democracy.  The U.S. did not liberate the Afghans; in fact, they have stolen the freedom of Afghanistan.\"  -- Editorial in Lahore-based English daily \"Daily Times,\" 5/31: \"Afghanistan's woes are not only or mainly because of Pakistan, an allegation that Mr. Karzai and his government have repeatedly hurled at Islamabad.  The Kabul rioters were not Taliban; they were common Afghans unhappy with the situation...The incident should also put the U.S. on notice. The clock is ticking on its presence...\"  -- Op-Ed in national Urdu daily \"Nawa-e-Waqt,\" 6/1: \"The sudden rebellion in Kabul had nothing to do with Al-Qaida or Mullah Omar.  Moreover, Kabul is not dominated by Pashtuns. Americans say that the brakes of their truck had failed...It was not the failure of brakes of just one truck; the brakes of entire United States of America have failed.\"  -- Lahore-based English daily \"Daily Times,\" and national English daily \"The News\" 6/2: Both dailies carried in full a transcription of the June 1 NY Times editorial \"Afghanistan, Unraveling.\"  -- Op-Ed in National English daily \"The News,\" 6/2: \"...the scale of the furious anti-America riots in the capital city of Afghanistan has confounded the US and its western allies....The intriquing aspect of the deadly riots was the preponderance of Tajiks...The U.S. and its allies ... should have known that the Afghan people wouldn't indefinitely tolerate the presence of foreign, non-Muslim troops.  -- Article in Lahore-based English daily \"Daily Times\" 6/4: Transcribed AFP story headlined: \"'Bad Behavior' Holding US Troops back from Conquering Kabul.\"   2. (C) Comment: The rioting in Kabul has struck different chords in Pakistan.  Anti-U.S. Islamists trumpet it as an indication that western \"occupation\" of Afghanistan is on its last legs.  Elsewhere, the unrest is seen as lending credence to the view that violence in Afghanistan has indigenous roots (including among Tajiks) and is not Pakistan's responsibility.  A broader and more thoughtful concern is that if Karzai and the coalition are in fact in trouble in Afghanistan, the implications for Pakistan are not good.  The excellent analysis in reftel will be most helpful as we engage interlocutors here.  Given the impact of the U.S. media on local commentary, we hope Department backgrounders will help put the incident in context and bring a sense of proportion to media coverage. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD10467|06ISLAMABAD9890", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/5/2006 12:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 010467  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  USAID PASS TO MARK WARD AND RICKI GOLD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PK, AADP, EAID SUBJECT: ELECTION COMMISSION STARTS TO UNVEIL ITS PLAN FOR 2007 ELECTIONS - IMPLICATIONS FOR US SUPPORT  REF: ISLAMABAD 9890  ISLAMABAD 00010467  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER; REASON 1.4 (g)  1.  (C) Summary: Encouraging developments out of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) and from senior GOP officials indicate that US-led international pressure may be chipping away at the business-as-usual approach many expected from Pakistan,s electoral machinery.  Building on over one year of USG analysis and consultations with political parties, NGOs, election officials, and international experts, the US is pursuing a multi-donor strategy that includes continued diplomatic-level dialogue backed up by technical assistance and commodities.  Reftel laid out our strategy.  Now is the time to move forward. End Summary.  2.  (U) Pakistan,s new Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) met with a 15-member European Union ambassador,s delegation late last week.  At that meeting, which received extensive coverage in both the broadcast and print national media, the Commissioner reiterated his commitment to overseeing free and fair parliamentary elections that will be   \"credible by any standard\" and within the constitutionally mandated timeframe of November 15, 2007 to January 15, 2008.  3.  (U) In his briefing for EU ambassadors, the CEC described, in essence, all elements of the assistance program the Election Commission had negotiated with USAID over the last year, including computerized voter lists, transparent ballot boxes, and Election Commission engagement with all major political parties in the development of an Electoral Code of Conduct.  4. (U) The computerized electoral rolls were characterized by the CEC as a \"sine qua non\" for free and fair elections in the 2007 national elections and those that follow in the future.  The old manual voter lists used in the past were open to manipulation and could not be updated to correct errors, add those who had reached voting age, or to remove the names of those who had died.  5. (U) Of particular importance to the opposition parties and local-level Election Commission officials alike was the announcement that transparent ballot boxes would be placed in each of the country,s polling stations.  The opposition parties do not view transparent ballot boxes as a silver bullet that will somehow right all electoral-process wrongs, but instead regard them as an important confidence-building measure.  Election officials, meanwhile, are breathing a sigh of relief at the prospect of distributing lightweight plastic boxes to polling stations instead of the ten-pound monstrosities they had to lug around in the past.  (Note: This was mentioned as a particular concern of female election officials. End Note.)  6.  (C)  Post also met with the newly appointed Minister of Information over the weekend.  He described his meeting earlier that day with the Election Commission Secretary. At that meeting, the Minister told the Secretary that the government wants the ECP to be more independent and to act with more confidence.  (Note: On paper, Pakistan,s and India,s Election Commissions have an equal degree of independence.  The difference is that India,s Chief Election Commissioners of late have flexed their muscles and made use of their independence thereby raising the quality of and respect for that country,s election process.  Meanwhile, Pakistan,s CECs have traditionally been timid and behaved as if they worked for the sitting government.  End Note.) The Minister of Information offered the Election Commission free access to government-owned airwaves to provide public education on voter registration and voting procedures.  He  ISLAMABAD 00010467  002.2 OF 003   also encouraged the Election Commission to engage with all political parties, including the opposition.  7.  (C)  Reiterating the President,s and Prime Minister,s commitment to free and fair elections, the Information Minister offered to serve as a conduit for exchange of views between the US and his bosses.  He said he understands the importance the international community attaches to the upcoming elections and said that Pakistan does not want to be embarrassed.  8.  (C) US Support for the Elections  USAID, working in close consultation over the past year with POL, political parties, NGOs, and like-minded diplomatic missions in Islamabad, has outlined a program to support the electoral process, which reflects present and projected resource envelopes, on-the-ground realities in Pakistan, and priorities identified by those who know the present system,s flaws best.  Elements of the US program include the following:  --Computerized Electoral Rolls.  As noted in para. 4, the Election Commission has characterized computerized voter lists as a sine qua non for free and fair elections.  Without US assistance, however, this will not get done. Although the Election Commission has already started the process, our technical assistance and limited computer equipment are necessary to get the job completed by the Fall of 2007.  --Transparent Ballot Boxes. Outsiders may see these as fig leaves that cannot adequately cover Pakistan,s other electoral weaknesses.  However, the importance civil society and opposition parties attach to this confidence-building measure cannot be overstated. No one is nave enough to view transparent ballot boxes as a silver bullet, but all see them as a necessary and much-appreciated step in the right direction.  --Political Party Engagement.  Two of the chief criticisms of past elections have been that the government apparatus has always mobilized to support ruling party candidates and that the Election Commission has had a closed-door policy with opposition parties.  That the Election Commission has now committed to working with all political parties constitutes real progress.  The UNDP will act as a public  \"front\" in coordinating Election Commission/political party consultations while USAID programming will provide assistance to the political parties to help make the exchanges as constructive and productive as possible.  (Note: This assistance is in addition to already-existing NDI programs funded by USAID and DRL that are helping political parties understand how to organize campaigns, improve internal democracy, develop messages, conduct member drives, and groom future leaders. End Note)  --Funding levels for the USG assistance outlined above total approximately $16 million.  --Other election-related USAID programming in 2007.  The above longer-term activities will be augmented by some combination of election-observation support, election-worker training, election-process assessment, and post-election after actions totaling approximately $3 million.  Decisions on the precise mix of these activities will be made once we get clarity on the type and levels of support that will be provided by other donors, most notably, DfID, the EU, Canada, Norway, Australia and UNDP.  9.  (C)  Pakistan,s political parties and politically oriented NGOs also identify interference from security and intelligence agencies as well as intimidation and violence  ISLAMABAD 00010467  003.2 OF 003   tactics used by various political parties as key issues impeding free and fair elections in the past.  Such issues, however, do not lend themselves to development project programming. To complement our proposed programming, these issues will continue to be talking points for the US Embassy and for representatives of all like-minded diplomatic missions in Islamabad.  10.  (C)  Comment:  The US anticipated and began planning its support for the 2007 elections over one year ago.  Ongoing meetings with every  major political party, participation in the numerous fora where the political parties have met collectively, combined with regular meetings with politically active NGOs and listening to the concerns of national, provincial and local election officials has allowed post to understand the critical weaknesses that could impede free and fair elections in Pakistan and to gauge our response accordingly.  We have found an unusual degree of agreement among these diverse actors on what they believe is necessary to improve the credibility of elections.  Over the next 18 months, US programming and diplomatic dialogue will largely go toward helping the system respond to these demands and improving the dialogue between the Election Commission and the political parties that depend on it to oversee quality elections.  Although some degree of back-sliding can be expected over the coming months, the attention the Election Commission and GOP are giving to upcoming elections this early in the game indicates that the international community,s  message is being clearly received.  We laid out our thoughts on a  comprehensive election strategy in reftel.  These recent developments are another indication that we are on the right track in terms of timing and substance.  We need to move now. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9706", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2006 11:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010539  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, MARR SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF AND ADVISORS CONFER ON FATA PLAN IMPLEMENTATION  REF: ISLAMABAD 9706  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  In a May 6 conversation, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz told the Ambassador that President Musharraf had convened a meeting of his senior advisors on May 5 to discuss next steps in implementing the government's Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) strategy.  The participants -- Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan Hayat, 11th Corps Commander LTG Mohammad Hamid Khan, ISI Director General Kayani, newly-appointed NWFP Governor Orakzai and Aziz -- agreed that Governor Orakzai should convene a jirga(s) to garner the broadest possible tribal support for the government's policy of comprehensive economic and social development in the context of a calm security environment. Aziz said that the a \"calm security environment\" explicitly rules out cross border infiltration and harboring foreigners.  Recognizing that this will be a complex process, Musharraf left to Governor Orakzai's discretion whether to organize a series of jirgas or to convene a grand jirga.  2.  (C)  At the request of the GEN Ahsan, participants also agreed that new Political Agents assigned to the FATA would not be appointed from the ranks of currently serving or recently retired military officers.  Aziz thought it noteworthy that GEN Ahsan himself observed that the Pakistani Army is so disliked in the tribal areas that assigning military officers as FATA administrators would only add to the government's troubles.  (Note:  This account from Aziz directly contradicts June 3 press reports that Musharraf had decided to use military officers as FATA political agents. End note.)  3.  (C) Aziz also reported that Sahibzada Imtiaz has been appointed head of the FATA Development Authority.  The Ambassador remarked that he hoped that this appointment would lead the government to produce, in short order, a fully-developed plan for the FATA, expanding on the concepts put forward in the Economic Initiative for the FATA paper drafted by Minister of Industries Jehangir Khan Tareen.  4.  (C)  Aziz candidly told the Ambassador that the situation in the FATA is frightening, saying that the government must \"get it right\" this time.  When the Ambassador asked about press reports that NWFP Chief Minister Akram Khan Durrani and the provincial government were also being brought into the effort (an alliance, in the Ambassdor's view, akin to letting the fox into the hen house), Aziz replied that stark political realities underlay Durrani's Jamiat-e-Ulema-e-Islam (F) (JUI-F) support of the government's FATA campaign:  the \"Talibanization\" of the FATA is eroding JUI-F's political base in the tribal areas.  Chief Minister Durrani's uncle was murdered by Taliban in April and Taliban forces are now setting their sites on Durrani's home district of Bannu. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE89324", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2006 12:30", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010554  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/05/2011 TAGS: PREL, AORC, IAEA, KNNP, UNSC, IR, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON NAM STATEMENT ON IRAN  REF: STATE 89324  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) On June 3, Poloff delivered reftel demarache points to the Ministry of Foreign Affair's UN Director, Imran Siddiqui.  Siddiqui explained that for many delegations the preoccuption with the potential use of force against Iran drove the NAM's statement in support of Iran.  Siddiqui said that the original version of the statement, which was introduced by the Iranian delegation, was much more emphatic in its support of Iran but subsequent negotations among the various delegations toned down the final version.  Siddiqui added that many member states were reluctant to push for even the slightest rebuke of Iran lest it be used by the UN Security Council or the USG as justification for military action.  Asked about the Pakistani delegation's role in the negotiations on the final statement, Siddiqui remarked that the Pakistani delegation tried only to work as a consensus-maker and did not advocate in any one direction.  2. (C) Despite Pakistan's interest in preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, Siddiqui said that strong cultural, economic and religious ties with Iran as well as a paramount desire for stability in the region compel the GOP to go only to the extent of publicly saying that Iran should comply with its NPT obligations. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2006 12:30", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 010555  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2011 TAGS: AF, PK, IN, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN OBJECTION TO NAM STATEMENT ON AFGHANISTAN  REF: A. FAGIN-BECK 6/2/06 E-MAIL       B. STATE 89324  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) On June 3 Poloff meet with Ministry of Foreign Affairs UN Director, Imran Siddiqui.  After delivering demarche points on the NAM's statement on Iran (reftel B), Poloff asked Siddiqui to explain why the Pakistani delegation objected to a paragraph in the final document at the NAM's Ministerial conference that called for curbing support for the Taliban.  Siddiqui said that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) objected to certain paragraphs on Afghanistan in the final document but added that media reports were misleading. Siddiqui reported that the Indian delegation publicly accused the GOP of supporting the Taliban on the floor of the NAM conference.  Somewhat sympathetic to the Afghan representative, Siddiqui said that the Indian delegation also pushed the Afghan delegation in joining them in taking an accusatory stance against Pakistan.   Siddiqui pointed out two paragraphs from the final document that the Pakistani delegation particularly found unacceptable. (Full text of these paragraphs from NAM's final document in paragraph 4.)  2. (C) Siddiqui explained that the Pakistani delegation objected to paragraph 144, which mention former Taliban cadres regrouping in the Southern and Eastern parts of Afghanistan only and not in other areas of the country (e.g. areas not bordering Pakistan).  The Pakistani delegation also objected to the final document's recommendation in paragraph 147.2.  Siddiqui said the document reads that the Taliban members are regrouping in Southern and Eastern parts of Afghanistan and then urges States to refrain from supporting them, essentially accusing the GOP of complicity with the Taliban.  Siddiqui added that Pakistan is fighting the  ISLAMABAD 00010555  002 OF 002   Taliban. As Afghanistan's neighbor, Pakistan, more than any other country (especially India) wants a stable Afghanistan. He concluded by saying that Pakistan will not accept accusations of this sort.  3. (SBU) Poloff thanked Siddiqui for explaining the GOP's concerns over the paragraphs while reaffirming both governments' desire for a stable Afghanistan.  4. (U) Reference paragraphs from purposed NAM declaration: (Begin text.)  144.  The Ministers expressed their deep concern that the terrorist groups including former Taliban cadres were regrouping in the Southern and Eastern parts of Afghanistan. Equally of concern was that the efforts of the international community to fight terrorism were being undermined by support, protection and shelter that these forces of destabilization continued to receive.  End text.  147.2.  Urge States to refrain from extending support, protection and shelter to former Taliban cadres, recognizing that failure to do so would seriously undermine efforts by the international community to combat terrorism in Afghanistan, and expressing concern that terrorist groups were regrouping in the Southern and Eastern parts of Afghanistan.  (End text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9706", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2006 3:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010608  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  CORRECTED COPY OF ISLAMABAD 10539  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, MARR SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY:  MUSHARRAF AND ADVISORS CONFER ON FATA PLAN IMPLEMENTATION  REF: ISLAMABAD 9706  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  In a June 6 conversation, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz told the Ambassador that President Musharraf had convened a meeting of his senior advisors on June 5 to discuss next steps in implementing the government's Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) strategy.  The participants -- Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan Hayat, 11th Corps Commander LTG Mohammad Hamid Khan, ISI Director General Kayani, newly-appointed NWFP Governor Orakzai and Aziz -- agreed that Governor Orakzai should convene a jirga(s) to garner the broadest possible tribal support for the government's policy of comprehensive economic and social development in the context of a calm security environment. Aziz said that the a \"calm security environment\" explicitly rules out cross border infiltration and harboring foreigners.  Recognizing that this will be a complex process, Musharraf left to Governor Orakzai's discretion whether to organize a series of jirgas or to convene a grand jirga.  2.  (C)  At the request of the GEN Ahsan, participants also agreed that new Political Agents assigned to the FATA would not be appointed from the ranks of currently serving or recently retired military officers.  Aziz thought it noteworthy that GEN Ahsan himself observed that the Pakistani Army is so disliked in the tribal areas that assigning military officers as FATA administrators would only add to the government's troubles.  (Note:  This account from Aziz directly contradicts June 3 press reports that Musharraf had decided to use military officers as FATA political agents. End note.)  3.  (C) Aziz also reported that Sahibzada Imtiaz has been appointed head of the FATA Development Authority.  The Ambassador remarked that he hoped that this appointment would lead the government to produce, in short order, a fully-developed plan for the FATA, expanding on the concepts put forward in the Economic Initiative for the FATA paper drafted by Minister of Industries Jehangir Khan Tareen.  4.  (C)  Aziz candidly told the Ambassador that the situation in the FATA is frightening, saying that the government must \"get it right\" this time.  When the Ambassador asked about press reports that NWFP Chief Minister Akram Khan Durrani and the provincial government were also being brought into the effort (an alliance, in the Ambassdor's view, akin to letting the fox into the hen house), Aziz replied that stark political realities underlay Durrani's Jamiat-e-Ulema-e-Islam (F) (JUI-F) support of the government's FATA campaign:  the \"Talibanization\" of the FATA is eroding JUI-F's political base in the tribal areas.  Chief Minister Durrani's uncle was murdered by Taliban in April and Taliban forces are now setting their sites on Durrani's home district of Bannu. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE78740", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2006 12:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010740  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2016 TAGS: PHUM, PREL, UN, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  DECLARATION ON THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES  REF: A. STATE 78740       B. STATE 91509  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On June 7, 2006, poloff joined Australian Deputy High Commissioner Jason Robertson in delivering demarche points and non-papers (Ref A) on the Chair's text of the Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples to MFA Director General (UN) Tasneem Aslam.  (Note:  Both the Australian High Commission and the Embassy had pressed the MFA for an appointment for several weeks, but the two senior officials in the UN Directorate were away from Islamabad on official travel for much of that time.  End note.)   Aslam thanked Robertson and poloff for the presentation, noting that the Government of Pakistan shares the concerns raised by Australia and the United States.  Pakistan understands that there must be a balance between individual and collective rights, otherwise chaos would prevail.  Aslam said that member states must have an opportunity for normal discussion and debate of the Chair's text, as it is important that the final document is fair and balanced.  The GOP will not support any document that erodes the authority of the state. She agreed that the text must clearly define what groups can claim status as \"indigenous people.\"  In its present form, Aslam observed, the Chair's text would cause member states more problems than it would solve.  Pledging that the GOP will take a closer look at the text, Aslam stressed that the GOP wants the new Human Rights Commission (HRC) to operate by consensus; there is no point in moving forward with a text that does not enjoy the support of many member states, particularly those with indigenous populations.  2.  (C) Aslam said that she believed that the first two weeks following the opening of the HRC session on June 19 would focus on high-level meetings and procedural issues.  She indicated that she would ask the Pakistani delegations in Geneva and in New York to be alert for any effort to move the Chair's text forward in either of those venues. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2006 13:22", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 010746  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IN, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SNAPSHOT OF UPCOMING ELECTIONS IN AJK  1.  Summary:  In July, voters in Pakistan-administered Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) will elect a new President, Prime Minister (PM), and legislative assembly (AJKLA).  Since 1975, elections in AJK have been regular and relatively fair.  The position of AJK President and Prime Minister has traditionally been held by two parties, the Muslim Conference (MC) and the Pakistan People's Party (PPP-AJK).  This cable provides a snapshot of the AJK electoral process, provides a brief history of elections, and gives a sketch of major political parties in AJK.  Paras 12 and 13 contain Post's comment on the upcoming elections.  End summary.  ----------------------------------------- KASHMIRI ELECTIONS AND ELECTORAL TIMELINE -----------------------------------------  2.  July elections will be held for a new AJK President, Prime Minister, and legislative assembly.  The legislative assembly is a body comprised of forty-nine seats.  Forty-one legislators are directly elected, and out of these forty-one, there is a quota of twelve seats for Kashmiri refugees living in Pakistan.  After the legislative assembly is elected, eight more seats will be indirectly elected.  The eight seats are broken down into five seats for women, one for an Islamic scholar, one for a technocrat, and one to represent Kashmiris residing overseas.  Elections will be held on July 11.  The deadline to file candidate nomination papers will expire on June 2.  3.  The AJK legislative assembly addresses local economic, infrastructure, and social issues.  Decisions on the broader issue of Kashmir's status are formulated by the Islamabad-based Kashmir Council.  The Pakistani Prime Minister sits as the chairman of the Council; the AJK President is the vice-chairman.  The Council consists of nine members, five of whom are appointed by the Pakistani Prime Minister, and four who are selected by the AJK legislative assembly.  The new Kashmir Council will be assembled soon after the July elections, once the AJK leadership and legislative assembly is in place.  --------------------------- HISTORY OF ELECTIONS IN AJK ---------------------------  4.  Elections in AJK were first held in 1975, after Pakistani PM Zulfikar Ali Bhutto established a branch of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) AJK. His intent was to weaken the influence of Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan, who Bhutto eventually put under house arrest.  With Sardar Qayyum out of the picture, Abdul Hameed Khan was elected as the first PM of AJK in 1975. When General Zia ul-Haq imposed martial law in Pakistan in 1977, the AJK Legislative Assembly was dissolved and General Hayat Khan was appointed as the Chief Executive. Hayat served until elections were held in 1985, when Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan was elected the President and Sardar Sikandar Hayat was chosen as the Prime Minister.  5.  Two major political parties, Muslim Conference (MC) and the Pakistan People's Party-AJK (PPP-AJK) have taken turns holding the majority of seats in the legislative assembly as well as the positions of prime minister and president.   MC led the government from 1985-90, and the PPP-AJK took over in 1990.  MC again took the lead in the 1991 elections and ruled until 1996.  PPP-AJK returned to power in 1996 until the MC regained the majority in 2001.  ----------------------- MAJOR POLITICAL PARTIES -----------------------  6. MUSLIM CONFERENCE (MC): Founded in 1932, MC is the oldest political party in AJK.  Sardar Abdul Qayyum -- also known as Mujahid-e-Awal \"the first holy warrior,\" as he is believed to have fired the first bullet in the 1947 war of liberation to  ISLAMABAD 00010746  002 OF 003   establish AJK -- has headed the party since 1967.  (Now his son, Sardar Attique Khan, heads the party.)  In 1998, Qayyum's differences with another powerful leader of MC, Sardar Sikandar Hayat, led to a temporary split in the MC. Before the 2001 elections, both MC leaders merged their factions to counter the PPP-AJK and won the elections. Sikandar was to serve as the PM for two and a half years before being succeeded by Sardar Attique Khan, who was PM for the remaining two and a half years.  When his term expired, Sikander refused to step down, putting a strain on party unity.  MC's manifesto supports Kashmir's annexation to Pakistan.  They support the right to struggle against Indian occupation of Kashmir, though MC has never been associated with any militant group, nor is there evidence that it has offered material support to the militancy.  MC supports the peace process with India, urging the Indian government to reduce the number of troops in Indian-administered Kashmir on its side of the LOC.  After the October 2005 earthquake, MC was criticized for its lack of response in the quake-hit areas.  Public support for MC has declined, but its historical influence will help win seats in the entire AKJ region this summer.  Recently, several MC legislative assembly members were denied party tickets to participate in the July elections and as a result, they have decided to form a separate faction.  7. PAKISTAN PEOPLE'S PARTY AJK (PPP-AJK):  Barrister Sultan of the PPP-AJK was elected as PM in 1996.  In 2001, he returned to his position of PPP-AJK party president, posturing himself as the leader of the opposition against the MC.  Sultan was replaced by Sahibzada Ishaq Zafar in 2004. Tension between Ishaq and Barrister increased during the February 2006 party elections when Barrister did not support the party-nominated candidate.  (Note: This violation of party policy led to Barrister's expulsion from the party.  In April 2006, Barrister founded his own political party: Jammu Kashmir People's Muslim League.  End note.)  PPP-AJK has never supported militant groups in Indian-administered Kashmir, though they support the right of Kashmiris to resist Indian occupation.  At the same time, they endorse the peace process with India.  After the earthquake, PPP-AJK's poor relief activities were criticized, especially in the districts of Rawalakot and Muzaffarabad.  8.  AJK People's Muslim League (AJK-PML):  Opposition leader Barrister Sultan formed this party in April 2006 after his disputes with AJK-PPP leader Sahibzada Ishaq Zafar.  His party has a strong presence in the three districts of Mirpur, Bhimber, and Kotli.  He also has a following in the adjoining areas of Jhelum, Gujrat, and Sialkot. Many local leaders of MC and AJK-PPP, who were not endorsed by their parties for the upcoming elections, have recently joined AJK-PML. AJK-PML does not support militant groups and encourages the ongoing Indo-Pak peace process.  9. JAMMU KASHMIR PEOPLE'S PARTY (JKPP):  Headed by Sardar Khalid Ibrahim Khan, the JKPP came into being as a splinter group of the PPP-AJK in 1990.  It enjoys strong support in the Rawalakot and Kotli districts.  Khalid recently met with PPP leader Benazir Bhutto, and there are reports that the JKPP has since formed an alliance with the PPP-AJK.  10. AJK MUTIHIDDA MAJLAS-E-AMAL (MMA): Established as an offshoot of the national MMA party, this political alliance was formed in March 2006.  Comprised of six religious and political parties, the MMA is lead by Sardar Ejaz Afzal Khan, who is also President of AJK Jamaat-i-Islami (AJKJI).  AJKJI has won public support from earthquake victims for their quick and sustained relief efforts.  Their relief performance is likely to win them significant political support in the three worst hit districts -- Muzaffarabad, Rawalakot and Bagh.  Despite the good public relations, however, AJKMMA is not going to win the majority of seats.  The JI rallies and provides support to the militant cause in Indian-administered Kashmir, and has a cordial relationship with Hizbul  ISLAMABAD 00010746  003 OF 003   Mujahideen (HM), a Kashmiri militant group.  Their public support for the Indo-Pak peace process is driven by public pressure, but JI does not hide its stance that militant struggle is the sole solution to push the Indians out of \"occupied Kashmir.\"  11. JAMMU KASHMIR LIBERATION FRONT (JKLF):  Founded by Amanullah Khan in 1977, it was JKLF that started the Kashmiri militancy in 1988.  The JKLF has three factions, each lead by Yasin Malik, Amanullah Khan, and Farooq Siddiqi.  Once a potent political force, JKLF does not play much of an active role in AJK politics today, as its demand for Kashmiri independence clashes with the GOP's preference for eventual Pakistani control over all of Kashmir.  JKLF supports the peace process between India and Pakistan, but rejects the idea of accession of Kashmir to either India or Pakistan. JKLF has not participated in previous legislative assembly elections, as every candidate is required sign an oath endorsing the idea of Kashmir,s accession to Pakistan. It is currently campaigning to get the oath requirement revoked so they can run in the July elections.  12.  (SBU)  Comment:  The AJK government provides Pakistan-administered Kashmir a veneer of democracy and governance infrastructure; major decisions are made in Islamabad, including negotiations on Kashmir with India and earthquake reconstruction.  The upcoming elections in AJK will assemble a legislative body and leadership who, because of the required oath to support Kashmir's accession to Pakistan, are likely to serve as a mouthpiece for Islamabad.  13.  (SBU)  Comment (cont):  At the moment, there is a collaborative push from AJK-PPP, MC, MMA, and JKLF to have the oath requirement revoked.  Without the oath, JKLF would be permitted to run on its platform of endorsing an independent, united Kashmir.  The pressure to repeal the oath also hints at a collective push for more decisionmaking authority for the AJK government.  Should Musharraf allow the oath to be scrapped, it would send a strong signal that he is willing to cede some authority to the AJK government. Regardless of his decision, Kashmir watchers believe the JKLF will not win many seats this summer.  It is also thought that the July elections will not bring PPP-AJK back into power, but that the MC will continue to head the AJK government. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9706|06PESHAWAR255", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/9/2006 13:40", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010849  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: BIO:  NWFP GOVERNOR MUHAMMAD ALI JAN ORAKZAI  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 9706      B. PESHAWAR 255  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (SBU)  Recently appointed the Governor of the New North West Frontier Province (NWFP), Lt. General (retired) Muhammad Ali Jan Orakzai is an Alikhel-Orakzai Pashtun from Orakzai Agency.  The Alikhel is the largest tribe in Orakzai Agency. Born in December 1947, he previously served as Corps Commander of the XI Corps, and most recently functioned as Secretary, Ministry for Defense Production.  Orakzai's  SIPDIS military career spanned 36 years and included the following achievements:  -- Corps Commander XI Corps (October 2001 to March 2004) -- Adjutant General of Pakistani Army (March 2000-October 2000) -- Vice Chief of General Staff (October 1999-March 2000) -- Deputy Chief of General Staff (November 1997-October 1999) -- Promoted to Major General (June 1994) -- Promoted to Brigadier General (July 1989) -- Commissioned in Pakistani Army (April 1968)  2. (SBU) During his military career, Orakzai commanded a Mechanized Infantry Battalion, two Infantry Brigades, two Infantry Divisions, and the Peshawar-based XI Corps.  His instructional assignments include: School of Infantry and Tactics (Quetta); Command and Staff College (Quetta); Iraqi Leadership College (Baghdad, Iraq); and National Defense College (Rawalpindi).  Orakzai graduated from the Command and Staff College (Quetta).  He speaks French in addition to Pashto, Urdu, and English.  Orakzai has been awarded the Hilal-I-Imtiaz (Military), Sitara-I-Basalat, and Chief-of-Army Staff Commendation Card.  3. (SBU) Orakzai has one daughter and three sons.  Two of his three sons are in the Pakistani Army, and his daughter is married to an army major.  His eldest son is a major currently studying at the Staff College (Quetta), and the middle son is a captain serving in the Frontier Force regiment.  Orakzai,s youngest son is studying at the University of Iowa.  4.  (C)  During Orakzai,s tenure as Corps Commander, the Pakistani Army first entered into the Khyber and Kurram agencies after 9/11 and attempted to capture Al Qaida and Taliban fighters fleeing Tora Bora.  He subsequently denied the presence of foreign militants in Wazirstan; some observers believe he was forced to retire because of his reluctance to carry out operations in Wana, South Wazirstan. As Corps Commander he created a development plan for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) -- implemented by the Army -- that triggered a turf-war with the Governor,s office that traditionally oversees FATA development.  While at MOD-P, Orakzai presided over a defense procurement strategy that emphasized conventional defense over GWOT shaping.  5.  (C) Comment:  Interlocutors believe Orakzai,s appointment is an acknowledgement that the NWFP (and FATA) need a stronger governor with tribal knowledge and affiliations.  Given his tribal and military background, the appointment is also seen as a signal that the new Governor will focus on FATA issues, and may be able to balance the relationship in the tribal region between the political administration and the military.  End comment.  6.  (U) This cable was prepared by AmConsul Peshawar. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD10261", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/9/2006 13:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 010850  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/09/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, IR, KNNP SUBJECT: GOP TELLS IRAN \"ENGAGE WITH P-5 + GERMANY\"  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 10261       B. ISLAMABAD 10142  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  In a June 9 conversation with the Ambassador, MFA Director General Khalid Mehmood passed on a read-out of Foreign Minister Kasuri's latest conversation with Iranian FM Muttaki.  Kasuri had called his Iranian counterpart after receiving a June 8 briefing by the EU-3 representatives on the P-5   Germany proposals.  (Note:  The Foreign Minister called Muttaki on his own initiative, not at the request of the EU-3.  End note.)  (C)  Kasuri told Muttaki that the P-5   Germany are serious and deserve full consideration.  These proposals could provide Tehran a way out of the current stalemate.  Kasuri encouraged Iran to take the path of positive engagement with the P-5   Germany.   Muttaki told Kasuri that the current P-5   Germany proposal is better than the previous offer. Muttaki said the international community has its interests while Iran has its own concerns:    there must be an effort to accommodate both.  (C)  Kasuri's impression following this conversation is that Iran will engage with the P-5   Germany, although pursuing these proposals could entail a prolonged process.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD9098|06STATE92033", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/13/2006 4:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011103  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPT FOR ISN/MNSA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/12/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PARM, MNUC, KNNP, CDG SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: FISSILE MATERIAL CUTOFF TREATY  REF: A. STATE 92033      B. ISLAMABAD 9098  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On June 12, poloff delivered ref A points to MFA Director (Disarmament Cell) Mohammad Kamran Akhtar, stressing the U.S. desire to avoid \"linkages\" in fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament (CD).   Akhtar responded that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) is ready to begin negotiations on the FMCT, in principal.  Akhtar noted that several of the issues described in A/S Rademaker's May 17 address to the CD  as unhelpful \"linkages\" were normative and legal in nature, representing substantive concerns, not procedural diversions.  Pakistan does not view these issues as Cold War holdovers; as many have contemporary relevance, the GOP wants a full discussion within a balanced framework of negotiations on the FMCT. Akhtar said that these points have been raised by Pakistan's Ambassador to the CD.  2.  (C)  Akhtar continued by noting that the U.S. proposal for the FMCT addresses only which states will maintain future stocks of fissile material.  The GOP feels that this approach neglects the two-pronged UNGA mandate for the CD, which encompassed both non-proliferation and disarmament.  The GOP believes that the FMCT should also address identify (and verify) existing stockpiles.  This is important in a regional context, according to Akhtar, as the GOP does not want the FMCT to freeze any asymmetry between India and Pakistan.  3.  (C)  We've been down this road before, Akhtar said, recalling that following the 1992 Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), India declared itself a non-possessor state.  Acording to Akhtar, Pakistan and India thereafter entered a non-verifiable bilateral agreement not to develop chemical weapons.  Pakistan was therefore unpleasantly surprise, Akhtar continued, in 1996 when India declared itself a possessor state.  The GOP does not want to find itself in a similar position, Akhtar concluded, with regard to the FMCT. (Note:  Akhtar has raised similar concerns regarding regional stability and verification in earlier discussions (Ref B). End note.)   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/13/2006 12:44", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011148  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PASS TO CFFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/13/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP READY TO RECEIVE BTIF DETAINEES  1.  (C)  At the June 6 Tripartite Commission meetings in Rawalpindi, GOP MFA Afghanistan Director, Aamir Shouket, told Poloff that he spoke with the Pakistani Ambassador to Kabul regarding the transfer of the four Pakistani detainees at Bagram Theater Internment Facility (BTIF).  The Ambassador had confirmed to Shouket that Pakistan was ready to receive the detainees as soon as they are given the go-ahead from Bagram.  2.  (C)  Comment: We understand that Bagram has been waiting for GOP concurrence before transferring the four detainees. We now have this concurrence. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/13/2006 14:40", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 011164  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  OSD/JCS - PLEASE PASS TO ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF GEN SCHOOMAKER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, MASS, MCAP, EAID SUBJECT: POLITICAL SCENESETTER FOR COUNTERPART VISIT BY VICE CHIEF OF ARMY STAFF GEN AHSAN   ISLAMABAD 00011164  001.2 OF 004   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE TELEGRAM.  WILL BE RESENT UNDER DIFFERENT MRN.  ISLAMABAD 00011164  002.2 OF 004    ISLAMABAD 00011164  003.2 OF 004    ISLAMABAD 00011164  004.2 OF 004   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE94561", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/15/2006 3:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011267  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, UN, PHUM SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL  REF: A. STATE 94561       B. ISLAMABAD 10740  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On June 14, poloff delivered Ref A points on the Human Rights Council (HRC) to MFA (UN) Director Shafqat Ali Khan.  Khan responded by saying that the Government of Pakistan  (GOP) also wants the HRC to get off to a strong start.  To that end, the GOP agrees that this initial session of the HRC should focus on procedural, not substantive, issues.  Khan agreed that the proposal to form a limited number of working groups under the HRC  to grapple with complex procedural question a novel and interesting approach; he said that the suggestion regarding special rapporteurs continuing their work over the course of the coming year is a novel proposal that the GOP would give serious consideration.  As to the prospect of the HRC considering the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Khan assured poloff that the GOP agrees with the U.S./Australian position, as presented to MFA Director General Tasneem Aslam on June 6 (Ref B).  The GOP is carefully studying the materials on the Declaration and has instructed its delegation in Geneva to be alert to any effort to bring this text forward.  2.  (C)  With regard to the U.S. request that OIC members exercise moderation and restraint with regard to sensitive issues, surrounding Israel, Palestine and the occupied territories, Khan replied that the GOP understands the USG point of view, but that domestic opinion in OIC member states is so strong that some members may feel forced to raise the issue at the HRC.  For Pakistan's part, the government cannot afford to been seen obstructing the efforts of other OIC members who wish to advance these issues.  As the OIC Chair in Geneva, the GOP must maintain a balance between its national interest and consensus among OIC member states.  The GOP will try to play a constructive role, Khan said, but is making no promises in advance of the HRC session. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/15/2006 12:56", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 011311  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  OSD/JCS - PLEASE PASS TO THE OFFICE OF ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF KABUL -- PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/15/2016 TAGS: EAID, MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: POLITICAL SCENESETTER FOR VISIT BY PAKISTAN VICE CHIEF OF ARMY STAFF  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  Introduction ------------ 1. (S) Pakistan,s President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward Musharraf's goal of \"enlightened moderation.\" Both viewed President Bush,s March visit to Pakistan as a landmark in the bilateral relationship.  In the past six months, Pakistan's leaders have survived the Danish cartoon controversy; engaged in suppressing violent separatists in Balochistan while also combating al-Qaeda and domestic Islamic extremists in the tribal areas along the Afghan border; and transitioned from the winter,s earthquake relief operations to long-term reconstruction.  Pakistan remains a tough public diplomacy environment, despite the public,s positive response to generous USG assistance in the earthquake relief effort.  U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership ----------------------------------- 2.  (S) During his March 2006 visit, President Bush launched a U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership.  This initiative has been institutionalized in the framework of a strategic dialogue addressing economic growth and prosperity, energy cooperation, peace and security, social sector development, science and technology, democracy, and non-proliferation. The inaugural meeting of the strategic dialogue held in Washington from April 26-27 was a step forward in reassuring Pakistan of the breadth and depth of our long-term commitment.  3.  (S)  In the wake of the media glare surrounding the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative, Pakistan,s military and political class have been wracked by a bout of insecurity and &me too-ism.8  Some government officials have complained privately that the U.S. has created a public perception that it is distancing itself from President Musharraf.  Coupled with public remarks by American and other western officials suggesting that Pakistan could do more in the Global War on Terror (GWOT), Pakistani sensitivities are particularly attuned to any hint of American criticism.  Global War on Terror -------------------- 4.  (S) FATA:  Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the GWOT, including its efforts to deny al Qaeda and other extremist elements safe haven in Pakistan's untamed tribal areas along the Afghan border. Following the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) decision to extend central government control into the FATA (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  As the security situation in both North and South Waziristan continued to deteriorate in late 2005-early 2006, the GOP was forced to rethink its FATA strategy.  Between March and May 2006, President Musharraf and his advisors articulated a new three-pronged strategy to extend the government's writ into the FATA, comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the FATA and to provide training for rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  5.  (C) Crackdown on Extremism:  In the aftermath of the July 7, 2005 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on domestic extremist organizations with much public fanfare, arresting the usual suspects and proposing strict regulation of Pakistan,s religious schools (madrassas).  As with previous crackdowns, the government ultimately released most  ISLAMABAD 00011311  002 OF 004   detainees and walked back many of the regulations on madrassa operations.  Although we are still assessing whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run, we believe that Musharraf,s crackdown moved the ball forward...albeit with many fall-backs along the way.  Aside from the crackdown,s uneven record, President Musharraf has been a consistent and vocal advocate of &enlightened moderation,8 in which he espouses a moderate and tolerant Islam for Pakistan as it finds its place within a globalized world.  6.  (C)  Extremism (cont):  The U.S. consistently presses senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of terrorist and extremist organizations, including those which were involved in earthquake relief efforts in northern Pakistan.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against those madrassas that support, recruit for, or shelter these organizations.  Domestic Issues --------------- 7.  (S)  Balochistan:  Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling a negotiated settlement, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity that must be suppressed. At the moment, the pendulum has swung toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the FATA and in the GWOT. Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan and in managing periodic domestic civil unrest, such as the cartoon controversy and sectarian tensions.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  8.  (C) Democracy:  President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007.  The government, which must address many organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, took an important initial step with the March 2006 appointment of a permanent, independent election commissioner acceptable to all mainstream parties.  The two largest opposition parties ) Benazir Bhutto,s Pakistan People,s Party (PPP) and Nawaz Sharif,s Pakistan Muslim League ) Nawaz (PML-N) ) have entered into a highly-publicized Charter for Democracy aimed at defeating the Musharraf government at the polls.  Given the long years of animosity between Bhutto and Sharif, this alliance may prove to be more political theater than a serious threat to Musharraf and the governing PML.  9.  (C)  Military v. Civilian Government:  In April 2005, the local media stirred up a frenzy following a statement by a senior USG official that the United States believes in civilian leadership of the military, reading it as one more signal that the U.S. was distancing itself from President Musharraf.  While these remarks reflect a fundamental principal of U.S. policy, we advise USG officials to also underscore in their public and private remarks our strong relationship with President Musharraf and our appreciation for his contributions in the war on terror, his efforts to improve relations with India, and for the steps he has taken to advance democracy in Pakistan.   ISLAMABAD 00011311  003 OF 004   10.  (SBU)  Building Democratic Institutions:  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  USAID and State are in the process of finalizing a USG-funded strategy to promote free and fair elections in 2007.  The Neighborhood ---------------- 11.  (S) Afghanistan:  The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan obsessed by the prospect of India using its diplomatic assets in Afghanistan to foment instability in Balochistan.  President Musharraf and most governmental and military leaders recognize that Pakistan must support the Karzai government's efforts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  12.  (S)  Afghanistan (cont):  That said, Musharraf and Karzai (and their subordinates) have had difficulty restraining themselves from engaging in regular bouts of destructive public rhetoric, in which each blames the other for not doing enough to effectively prosecute the battle against their common enemies in the tribal areas along the border.  More disturbing is that a good number of Pakistani officials remain piqued by the ascendency of Northern Alliance leaders following the U.S. rout of the Taliban in 2001; some now nurture a quasi-public schadenfreude as the Pashtun Taliban has re-emerged in Afghanistan's southern and eastern provinces.  13.  (S)  India/Kashmir:  President Musharraf and his senior advisors have consistently told us they have made a strategic decision to end the militancy.  Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in Delhi).  Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on the final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that New Delhi is not afraid to discuss pragmatic solutions to make the LOC less-relevant in people's lives, but has also chided Pakistan for holding normalization of bilateral relations hostage to a final resolution of the Kashmir dispute.  14. (S) India/Kashmir (cont):  India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue, and Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive.  President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful resolution of the dispute on terms acceptable to Pakistan, India, and the people of Kashmir.  15.  (C) India/Kashmir (cont):  Although there has been little progress on core issues relating to Kashmir (including the Siachen Glacier), senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue framework, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of bus and train routes between the two countries.  After 17 years, India and Pakistan have also  ISLAMABAD 00011311  004 OF 004   revived the Joint Commission to provide a forum for discussions on technical issues such as science and technology, information technology, telecommunications, and tourism.  Although delegations travel to/from Islamabad and New Delhi weekly, Pakistani negotiators work within strict parameters, as the GOP balances its desire to normalize the relationship with its fear of being accused of &giving8 India too much via CBMs without first securing an advantageous resolution of the Kashmir question.  16.  (S)  Iran:  Pakistan has a long and complicated relationship with its neighbor Iran.  GOP officials often allude to Pakistan,s vulnerability to Iranian trouble-making, citing the influence of co-religionists governing in Tehran on Pakistan,s sizable Shi,a community (approximately 20 percent of the population).  The GOP has walked a tightrope in response to the current crisis over Iran,s nuclear program, calling for all parties to abide by their international obligations and to pursue a negotiated resolution.  Privately, Prime Minister Aziz and Foreign Minister Kasuri recognize that continued conflict over Iran,s nuclear program has the potential to destabilize the region. Both have urged their Iranian counterparts to take the EU-3 and U.S. proposals seriously and begin negotiations forthwith.  17.   (C)  China:  In contrast to their perception of the U.S., many GOP officials -- civilian and military -- view China as Pakistan's \"reliable\" friend.  Many Pakistanis continue to view China through a Cold War halo, viewing Beijing as a bulwark protecting Pakistan from an expansionist India.  In contrast, current Chinese outreach to Pakistan sticks to the bottom line of business, without sermonizing about democracy, human rights or Islamic extremism.  China is well regarded by the Pakistan public for its high-profile investments in Pakistan's infrastructure (the Karakoram Highway, the current development of port facilities in Gwardar and energy resources in Balochistan), as well as for its economic prowess.   Chinese military sales -- unencumbered by the Congressional notifications and rigorous releasability reviews that characterize U.S. defense sales -- are often sweetened by attractive financing arrangements. Even so, Pakistani military officials candidly admit that they get what they pay for with Chinese arms and equipment...and that they would often prefer to buy American, but for the expense and political hurdles.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE94597", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/16/2006 2:33", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 011364  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/13/2016 TAGS: PTER, PREL, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED TO MINISTER SHERPAO ON FOREIGNERS IN MADRASSAS AND CAMPS  REF: A. STATE 94597       B. ISLAMABAD 3203      C. STATE 61083  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (S/NF) On June 13, Ambassador delivered Ref A demarche in a meeting with Interior Minister Sherpao. (The meeting also covered a broad range of others issues which are reported in septels.)  2.  (S/NF) Minister Sherpao agreed to Ambassador's request to provide the USG with a comprehensive list of Amcits and citizens of other western nations attending Pakistani madrassas.  He confirmed that he would include information on whether the madrassas being attended have extremist ties.  3.  (S/NF) Minister Sherpao said that the Government of Pakistan had queried respective foreign governments on whether their nationals had permission to study in Pakistani madrassas.  Students that had permission from their governments and only a few months of study remaining would be allowed to finished their coursework.  Foreign students that did not have such permission were required to leave Pakistan immediately. Sherpao reported that, to date, 29 countries had responded to the GOP.  Of the 1200 foreign students identified by the GOP, 457 had left Pakistan.  4.  (SBU) Note. As reported in Ref B, the MFA passed a dip note to the Embassy in February asking for U.S. approval regarding the continued study of eight Amcits in Pakistani madrassas.  Per Department instructions, the Embassy responded, via dip note dated May 11, that:  \"U.S. citizens do not require permission from the United States Government to travel or study abroad.  The Embassy cannot give any 'approval/no objection' confirmations for these students nor can it provide any guarantees or assurances on behalf of U.S. citizens.  The Embassy acknowledges that all private U.S. citizens are subject to local laws and the Embassy's role is to ensure that U.S. citizens are treated fairly in accordance with local laws.\"  End note. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/16/2006 2:33", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 011365  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KCRM, PHUM, KWMEN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES PAKISTAN'S TRAFFICKING EFFORTS WITH MINISTER SHERPAO   1. (U) On June 12, Ambassador met with Interior Minister Sherpao to cover a broad range of issues (other reported septels), including trafficking in persons.  Minister Sherpao said he had read the 2006 TIP report and found the section on Pakistan to be encouraging.  He also thanked Ambassador for his support of Pakistan's anti-trafficking efforts.  2. (SBU) Minister Sherpao agreed with the report's conclusion that internal trafficking occurs in Pakistan.  He said that the problem is getting provincial authorities, who currently have jurisdiction over internal trafficking, to act.  He added that he is working to get the provincial authorities to be more aggressive in fighting internal trafficking. Minister Sherpao also said that while currently the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) does not investigate internal trafficking cases, the Ministry will change the FIA's jurisdiction to include internal trafficking.  3. (SBU) Minister Sherpao also detailed two Government of Pakistan (GOP) initiatives that relate to its anti-trafficking efforts.  The first is a recently created Public Safety Commission at the federal level.  This Commission is intended to foster communication and create a working relationship between federal law enforcement officials and civil society.  The second initiative is the recently-created gender crimes unit at the FIA, which is intended to investigate crimes against women, including trafficking.  4. (SBU) Comment.  Although Minister Sherpao and Ambassador discussed a broad range of issues in their meeting, Minister Sherpao originally calling the meeting to discuss the 2006 TIP report demonstrates the high-level attention trafficking receives in the GOP.  End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/17/2006 7:01", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011431  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/17/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, UNSC, KPKO, KUNR SUBJECT: GOP CONCERNED BY POSSIBLE UN MANDATE REVIEW OF UNMOGIP   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable has an action request; please see paragraph 5.  2.  (C)  On June 16, MFA Additional Secretary (UN & Policy Planning) Tariq Osman Haider convened Ambassador to express the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) concern that the U.S. had included the UN Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) as an example of mandates that meet the criteria of the Ad Hoc Committee on Mandate Review for Phase I review. Haider cited a June 7 paper that circulated by Ad Hoc Committee co-chairs (U.S. and Slovakia) proposing0 five criteria for determining which mandates should be selected for Phase I review.  Haider said that the GOP was very surprised that the U.S. had included UNMOGIP as an example of a mandate meeting the paper's proposed criteria, given UNMOGIP's political sensitivity and peace-and-security mission.   Emphasizing the importance that Pakistan places on UNMOGIP, he predicted that any hint that the mission's mandate might be reviewed would prompted a negative reaction in the region and could adversely affect the Indo-Pak peace process.    Reminding Ambassador that the GOP has specifically underlined UNMOGIP's importance to senior USG officials during the April 2005 Strategic Dialogue in Washington, D.C., Haider asked directly whether the mission's inclusion in the co-chair's paper was intended as a signal from the U.S.  Why, he queried, chose UNMOGIP over hundreds of other mandates for Phase I review?  3. (C)  Noting that he was not/not aware of the either the co-chair's paper or any reference in it to UNMOGIP, Ambassador opined that there appeared nothing untoward in the suggestion that UNMOGIP might qualify for Phase I mandate review under the criteria proposed in the paper.   As the UNSC and its Ad Hoc Committee intend for the mandate review to be all-inclusive, there is nothing sinister about selecting UNMOGIP or any other mandate that meet the criteria for review.  UNSC review does not have a pre-determined outcome:  some mandates may receive ringing endorsements from the Council, while Council members may determine that others ought not be renewed because of duplication, inefficiency, etc.  Assuring Haider that the U.S. is fully aware of both the political sensitivity of UNMOGIP and the significance it has for the region, Ambassador said that he would ensure that both Department officials in Washington and at USUN were apprised of Pakistan's concerns.  4.  (C)  Note:  Quickly responding to post's request, IO and USUN have forwarded the co-chair's paper and background material regarding UNMOGIP's inclusion as an example of a mandate fitting the Phase I review criteria.   Post understands from these materials that the political sensitivity of UNMOGIP will exclude the mission from full Phase I mandate review, although the Council will likely request a technical briefing on UNMOGIP administration and operations.  End note.  5.  (C)  Comment and Action Request:  The prospect of a mandate review is a particularly neuralgic issue for the GOP; any suggestion that the UNSC might be seriously considering any change to the UNMOGIP mandate would prompt strong public reaction here.  Post requests Department provide talking points soonest responding to the MFA's concerns and reassuring the GOP that any review of UNMOGIP will be limited to a technical briefing to the UNSC. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD8541", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/19/2006 7:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011504  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2016 TAGS: ECON, EINV, EAID, PK, AF, PGOV SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER AZIZ DISCUSSES CHALLENGES ON THE AFGHAN BORDER AND REVIEWS ASSISTANCE REQUEST  REF: ISLAMABAD 8541  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C Crocker; Reason 1.4 (g)  1. (C)  Assistance Request.  In the course of a June 12 discussion (other subjects reported separately), Prime Minister Aziz noted that the government is moving ahead with a comprehensive strategy to bring stability to the tribal areas and recalled his request for US funding to support an $200-350 million expansion of the Frontier Corps as well as $150 million for economic and social development, as had been briefed to the President (reftel).  This would need to be over and above the Camp David commitment.  2. (C)  Challenges on Afghan Border.  Aziz noted that the requests had special urgency because of the accelerating destabilization on both sides of the Durand line; he stated the issues threatening Afghanistan were much deeper than previously predicted and that growing domestic dissent threatened both Pakistan and the US.  Aziz said the Government of Afghanistan still blamed Pakistan for its problems, which was making the President Musharraf and President Karzai relationship even more contentious.  The reality is that both governments are facing the same threat. Both hoped the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit would provide an opportunity for the two Presidents to improve their relationship.  3. (C)  Balochistan and FATA.   Ambassador urged Aziz to address the increasing Taliban influence in Balochistan and FATA.  Ambassador stated that the previous week in Kabul, he raised this issue with President Karzai, who indicated he was prepared to accept the refugees and supported the closing of camps such as Girdi Jungle and Pir Alizai in Balochistan. Aziz commented Karzai had not previously displayed such a cooperative approach to the refugee question, and noted that the GOP was gradually returning refugees.  4. (C)  Aziz said the GOP had evidence that \"a proxy force\" (i.e. India) was putting significant amounts of money into Balochistan and FATA to keep the Pakistan Army engaged in the area.  He noted the involvement of the Indian consulates on the Pakistani borders with Afghanistan (Jalalabad, Kandahar) and Iran (Zahedan), and stated that Indians often convened in and channeled money through Dubai.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE96389", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/19/2006 11:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011546  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, IR SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  OIC MINISTERIAL IN BAKU  REF: A. STATE 96389       B. ISLAMABAD 18050 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On June 17, poloff called on MFA Director (OIC) Jamil Ahmed to deliver Ref A points encouraging OIC members to reach a common, public position urging Iran to abandon its uranium enrichment and processing programs and enter serious negotiations on the incentive package offered by the P-5   1.   Poloff also expressed USG appreciation for the recent outreach by FM Kasuri and other senior Pakistani officials to their Iranian counterparts (Ref B), and hoped that Foreign Minister would take the opportunity to continue to press the same message at the Baku Ministerial.  Ahmed, who will travel with FM Kasuri and the Pakistani delegation to Baku, said that he would share the demarche points with the Foreign Minister's staff and other delegation members. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/20/2006 5:46", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 011675  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: FATA:  MISSING PAKISTANI JOURNALIST FOUND DEAD IN WAZIRISTAN   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  On June 17, Pakistani media reported that the body of Hayatullah Khan Dawar, a Pakistani journalist who has been missing since December 5, 2005, was discovered by local officials in North Waziristan on Friday, June 16.  The Mir Ali Assistant Political Agent Muhammad Fida Khan told the \"Daily Times\" that the body was found in the Khaisor mountains, four kilometers south of Mir Ali.  Fida Khan said that Hayatullah had been shot in the rear of his head, and that the body was hand-cuffed and looked very weak.  A long beard suggests Hayatullah had been in captivity since his disappearance six months ago.  2.  (U)  Hayatullah disappeared while working on an investigation of the death of Egyptian al Qaeda operative Hamza Rabia in Miran Shah, North Waziristan on December 1, 2005.  Pakistani security agencies maintained that Rabia had been killed in a blast caused by bomb-making explosives in the house in which he was hiding.  Hayatullah visited what remained of the house to investigate Rabia's death.  The \"Daily Times\" described his photos of the wreckage as including \"what some Western experts determined were parts of a Hellfire missile.\"  Hayatullah's account, which was widely covered in Pakistan and abroad, speculated that the missile had been launched by a CIA drone.  According to media accounts, Hayatullah's family maintains that he began receiving threats from \"certain quarters\" soon after the story broke, with an unidentified \"political administration\" official offering him three options:  leave North Waziristan, stop reporting or accept a government job.  3.  (SBU)  News of Hayatullah's death has prompted a strong reaction, with sympathetic politicians turning out for demonstrations in several cities organized by the Tribal Union of Journalists and other media advocacy organizations. Both the English- and Urdu-language press have condemned the killing, which has raised more questions than it has answered:  Who abducted Hayatullah?  Why was he confined for so many months before being killed?  Most press outlets have expressed deep skepticism regarding the government's claim that Hayatullah was kidnapped and executed by al Qaeda sympathizers.  Although stopping short of accusing the USG, the majority have openly accused Pakistani security forces of complicity in the journalist's death, saying that government forces had more to gain by silencing Hayatullah --  whose reporting directly contradicted official accounts of Rabia's death -- than did tribal militants sympathetic to al Qaeda. Journalists point to the timing of the disappearance so soon after Rabia's death, the government's failure to launch a serious public investigation into the kidnapping,  the coincidental discovery of the body soon after local officials told the family to expect \"good news\" and even the handcuffs binding the victim as evidence of government involvement in this crime.  4.  (S)  The description of Hayatullah's death in the June 17 edition of the \"Daily Times\" tracks with details a senior Pakistani security official shared with the Ambassador on the evening of June 16, with the exception that the official said that Hayatullah's body was dumped in Mir Ali proper.  The GOP official  said that Hayatullah had lost 15 kilos of body weight; his body bore clear signs of torture during his captivity.  The GOP official opined that Hayataullah had been captured, held and interrogated by al Qaeda sympathizers who blamed the reporter for the death of Hamza Rabia, believing that Hayatullah and other journalists operating in the FATA provided information on the identities and locations of Islamic militants to Pakistani and American security forces.  5.  (C)  Comment:  Assuming the security official's version is accurate, it is another grim commentary on the extent to which control in the tribal areas, especially the Waziristans, has slipped away from the Government.  The ability of militants to kidnap, hold a execute Hayatullah and then dump his body in a public place is a graphic, but no longer surprising, illustration of their capacity to operate with impunity. On the same day that Hayatullah was killed,  ISLAMABAD 00011675  002 OF 002   two female teachers and their daughters were murdered in an adjacent agency as a warning against education for women.  6.  (C) Comment (cont):  Allegations that the USG may have been involved in Hayatullah's disappearance peaked in April 2006, when a report issued by the Committee to Protect Journalists alleged that a Pakistani military officer had told Hayatullah's family that he had been turned over to the U.S.  In early May, the Department approved press guidance stating \"Hayatullah Khan is not known to the United States. We have no information on his whereabouts.\"  The press guidance received prominent coverage in the Pakistani press on May 10, after its release by the U.S. Consulate in Peshawar, and is no doubt partly responsible for reducing attention directed toward the USG in connection with this case now that Hayatullah's body has been found.  End comment.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD11267|06STATE99490", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/20/2006 12:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 011708  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PHUM, UN SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  ANTICIPATED OIC ASSAULT ON ISRAEL AT HRC  REF: A. STATE 99490      B. ISLAMABAD 11267  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  At a June 19 lunch with Director General of the MFA Khalid Mahmood, Ambassador raised Ref A points regarding the possibility of highly politicized statements and resolutions regarding Israel at the initial session of the Human Rights Council (HRC) in Geneva.  Mahmood said that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) agreed that this opening session of the HRC should focus on procedural, not substantive, issues.  (Ref B)  He took the Ambassador's point that OIC-initiated resolutions and debate targeting Israel would disrupt the HRC session, dragging this new fora back into the quagmire that discredited the Commission on Human Rights.  Mahmood said that he would share the Ambassador's message immediately with Foreign Minister Kasuri, who is already in Baku at the OIC Ministerial.  2.  (C)  Comment:  Pakistan serves as the OIC representative in Geneva and has often cited its obligation to represent the OIC consensus, rather than its national position, when confronted with its unhelpful actions on matters involving Israel.  Now that it is a member of the HRC, Pakistan has a strong national interest  in ensuring that this initial session gets off to a good start, perhaps strong enough to prompt the GOP to take greater efforts to exert a moderating influence over more vehement OIC members.   End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/21/2006 8:22", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 011740  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, MASS SUBJECT: POLITICAL SCENESETTER FOR DOD U/S RYAN HENRY'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S) Embassy Islamabad welcomes your June 25-28 visit to Islamabad.  Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz are western-oriented modernizers who are trying to move Pakistan toward Musharraf's goal of \"enlightened moderation.\" Both viewed President Bush,s March visit to Pakistan as a landmark in the bilateral relationship.  In the past six months, Pakistan's leaders have survived the Danish cartoon controversy; engaged in suppressing violent separatists in Balochistan while also combating al-Qaeda and domestic Islamic extremists in the tribal areas along the Afghan border; and transitioned from the winter's earthquake relief operations to long-term reconstruction.  Pakistan remains a tough public diplomacy environment, despite the public's positive response to generous USG assistance in the earthquake relief effort.  U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership ----------------------------------- 2.  (S) During his March 2006 visit, President Bush launched a U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Partnership.  This initiative has been institutionalized in the framework of a strategic dialogue addressing economic growth and prosperity, energy cooperation, peace and security, social sector development, science and technology, democracy, and non-proliferation. The inaugural meeting of the strategic dialogue held in Washington from April 26-27 was a step forward in reassuring Pakistan of the breadth and depth of our long-term commitment.  3.  (S)  In the wake of the media glare surrounding the U.S.-India Civil Nuclear Initiative, Pakistan,s military and political class have been wracked by a bout of insecurity and \"me too-ism.\"  Some government officials have complained privately that the U.S. has created a public perception that it is distancing itself from President Musharraf.  Coupled with public remarks by American and other western officials suggesting that Pakistan could do more in the Global War on Terror (GWOT), Pakistani sensitivities are particularly attuned to any hint of American criticism.  Global War on Terror -------------------- 4.  (S) FATA:  Pakistan deserves commendation for standing with us in the GWOT, including its efforts to deny al Qaeda and other extremist elements safe haven in Pakistan's untamed tribal areas along the Afghan border. Following the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) decision to extend central government control into the FATA (historically a \"no go\" region for government forces), we have regularly encouraged Pakistani security forces to stay the course in the face of armed resistance.  As the security situation in both North and South Waziristan continued to deteriorate in late 2005-early 2006, the GOP was forced to rethink its FATA strategy.  Between March and May 2006, President Musharraf and his advisors articulated a new three-pronged strategy to extend the government's writ into the FATA, comprising political initiatives, economic development and military operations that are faster, leaner and more targeted than in the past.  We have offered to assist Pakistan's economic development efforts in the FATA and to provide training for rapid strike capabilities as it realigns its military tactics.  5.  (C) Crackdown on Extremism:  In the aftermath of the July 7, 2005 London bombings, President Musharraf cracked down on domestic extremist organizations with much public fanfare, arresting the usual suspects and proposing strict regulation of Pakistan,s religious schools (madrassas).  As with previous crackdowns, the government ultimately released most detainees and walked back many of the regulations on madrassa operations.  Although we are still assessing whether the President has the will to hold the line against Pakistan's extremist elements for the long run, we believe that Musharraf's crackdown moved the ball forward...albeit with  ISLAMABAD 00011740  002 OF 004   many fall-backs along the way.  Aside from the crackdown's uneven record, President Musharraf has been a consistent and vocal advocate of \"enlightened moderation,\" in which he espouses a moderate and tolerant Islam for Pakistan as it finds its place within a globalized world.  6.  (C)  Extremism (cont):  The U.S. consistently presses senior GOP officials to act decisively against the operational leaders of terrorist and extremist organizations, including those which were involved in earthquake relief efforts in northern Pakistan.  We have also encouraged GOP officials to take action against those madrassas that support, recruit for, or shelter these organizations.  Domestic Issues --------------- 7.  (S)  Balochistan:  Pakistani leaders are also struggling to cope with an insurgency in the resource-rich province of Balochistan, as local Baloch tribesmen seek to redress historic grievances against Pakistan and seize a greater share of their provincial patrimony.  President Musharraf has swung back and forth between civilian advisors who are counseling a negotiated settlement, and military advisors who view the insurgency as an Indian-sponsored threat to national unity that must be suppressed. At the moment, the pendulum has swung toward the military option. This has clear implications for the military's ability to pursue shared U.S.-Pakistan objectives in the FATA and in the GWOT. Pakistani security forces are already over-stretched along the Afghan border, in North and South Waziristan and in managing periodic domestic civil unrest, such as the cartoon controversy and sectarian tensions.  An escalation in armed conflict in Balochistan would create an inauspicious political environment in the run-up to national elections next year.  8.  (C) Democracy:  President Musharraf has committed - publicly and privately - to move Pakistan toward a civilian-led democracy by the next national elections, which must be held by 2007.  The government, which must address many organizational issues before the 2007 national elections, took an important initial step with the March 2006 appointment of a permanent, independent election commissioner acceptable to all mainstream parties.  The two largest opposition parties (Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and Nawaz Sharif,s Pakistan Muslim League) Nawaz (PML-N) ) have entered into a highly-publicized Charter for Democracy aimed at defeating the Musharraf government at the polls.  Given the long years of animosity between Bhutto and Sharif, this alliance may prove to be more political theater than a serious threat to Musharraf and the governing PML.  9.  (C)  Military v. Civilian Government:  In April 2005, the local media stirred up a frenzy following a statement by a senior USG official that the United States believes in civilian leadership of the military, reading it as one more signal that the U.S. was distancing itself from President Musharraf.  While these remarks reflect a fundamental principal of U.S. policy, we advise USG officials to also underscore in their public and private remarks our strong relationship with President Musharraf and our appreciation for his contributions in the war on terror, his efforts to improve relations with India, and for the steps he has taken to advance democracy in Pakistan.  10.  (SBU)  Building Democratic Institutions:  At the operational level, USAID supports democratization efforts with programs to promote institutional development of the courts, the legislatures, and the political parties.  USAID and State are in the process of finalizing a USG-funded strategy to promote free and fair elections in 2007.  The Neighborhood  ISLAMABAD 00011740  003 OF 004   ---------------- 11.  (S) Afghanistan:  The roller-coaster relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghans concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan obsessed by the prospect of India using its diplomatic assets in Afghanistan to foment instability in Balochistan.  President Musharraf and most governmental and military leaders recognize that Pakistan must support the Karzai government's efforts to solidify its control over the country.  To that end, the Government is committed to cooperating on operational security matters with the Afghan government and coalition forces through regular Tripartite Commission meetings.  12.  (S)  Afghanistan (cont):  That said, Musharraf and Karzai (and their subordinates) have had difficulty restraining themselves from engaging in regular bouts of destructive public rhetoric, in which each blames the other for not doing enough to effectively prosecute the battle against their common enemies in the tribal areas along the border.  More disturbing is that a good number of Pakistani officials remain piqued by the ascendency of Northern Alliance leaders following the U.S. rout of the Taliban in 2001; some now nurture a quasi-public schadenfreude as the Pashtun Taliban has re-emerged in Afghanistan's southern and eastern provinces.  13.  (S)  India/Kashmir:  President Musharraf and his senior advisors have consistently told us they have made a strategic decision to end the militancy.  Musharraf believes the GOP's ability to control Kashmiri militants will be greatly enhanced if there is measurable progress with India on Kashmir.  He has specifically pushed for a withdrawal of Indian forces from key population centers in Indian-administered Kashmir (a demand viewed with great skepticism in Delhi).  Musharraf has privately signaled flexibility on the final status of Kashmir, but in public remains steadfast in rejecting the Line of Control (LOC) as a permanent international boundary.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that New Delhi is not afraid to discuss pragmatic solutions to make the LOC less-relevant in people's lives, but has also chided Pakistan for holding normalization of bilateral relations hostage to a final resolution of the Kashmir dispute.  14. (S) India/Kashmir (cont):  India has long resisted the involvement of third parties in settling the Kashmir issue, and Pakistani leaders understand that any move toward a direct mediating role by the U.S. would be counterproductive.  President Musharraf was pleased by President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful resolution of the dispute on terms acceptable to Pakistan, India, and the people of Kashmir.  15.  (C) India/Kashmir (cont):  Although there has been little progress on core issues relating to Kashmir (including the Siachen Glacier), senior Indian and Pakistani officials meet regularly through the Composite Dialogue framework, which has produced some confidence-building measures, including a pre-notification agreement for ballistic missile launches and the opening of bus and train routes between the two countries.  After 17 years, India and Pakistan have also revived the Joint Commission to provide a forum for discussions on technical issues such as science and technology, information technology, telecommunications, and tourism.  Although delegations travel to/from Islamabad and New Delhi weekly, Pakistani negotiators work within strict parameters, as the GOP balances its desire to normalize the relationship with its fear of being accused of \"giving\" India too much via CBMs without first securing an advantageous resolution of the Kashmir question.  16.  (S)  Iran:  Pakistan has a long and complicated  ISLAMABAD 00011740  004 OF 004   relationship with its neighbor Iran.  GOP officials often allude to Pakistan's vulnerability to Iranian trouble-making, citing the influence of co-religionists governing in Tehran on Pakistan,s sizable Shi'a community (approximately 20 percent of the population).  The GOP has walked a tightrope in response to the current crisis over Iran's nuclear program, calling for all parties to abide by their international obligations and to pursue a negotiated resolution.  Privately, Prime Minister Aziz and Foreign Minister Kasuri recognize that continued conflict over Iran's nuclear program has the potential to destabilize the region. Both have urged their Iranian counterparts to take the EU-3 and U.S. proposals seriously and begin negotiations forthwith.  17.   (C)  China:  In contrast to their perception of the U.S., many GOP officials -- civilian and military -- view China as Pakistan's \"reliable\" friend.  Many Pakistanis continue to view China through a Cold War halo, viewing Beijing as a bulwark protecting Pakistan from an expansionist India.  In contrast, current Chinese outreach to Pakistan sticks to the bottom line of business, without sermonizing about democracy, human rights or Islamic extremism.  China is well regarded by the Pakistan public for its high-profile investments in Pakistan's infrastructure (the Karakoram Highway, the current development of port facilities in Gwardar and energy resources in Balochistan), as well as for its economic prowess.   Chinese military sales -- unencumbered by the Congressional notifications and rigorous releasability reviews that characterize U.S. defense sales -- are often sweetened by attractive financing arrangements. Even so, Pakistani military officials candidly admit that they get what they pay for with Chinese arms and equipment...and that they would often prefer to buy American, but for the expense and political hurdles.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD10467|06ISLAMABAD9890", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/22/2006 13:40", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 011883  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  USAID PASS TO MARK WARD AND RICKI GOLD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2016 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PREL, PK, AADP, EAID SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ELECTION MONITORING IN PAKISTAN  REF: A) ISLAMABAD 9890 B) ISLAMABAD 10467  ISLAMABAD 00011883  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER; REASON 1.4 (G)  1.  (U) SUMMARY:  Effective monitoring is vital to strengthen the credibility of Pakistan's upcoming elections.  Among other things, this requires strong coordination and a broadly international response. Multiple election monitoring initiatives involving many donors will waste scarce resources and lead to a duplication of effort.  Now is the time to begin engaging with like-minded partners to ensure that election-related programs, including election monitoring and observation plans, are as streamlined, coordinated and cohesive as possible.  END SUMMARY  2.  (U)  Per reftels, post strongly believes that international observation of the upcoming Pakistan elections will be critical to ensuring a free and fair contest.  During previous elections, including local contests in 2005, candidates routinely engaged in blatant violations of election laws and regulations during the voting process. These violations were perpetrated mostly by candidates and parties linked to the central government.  Anecdotal evidence from the 2002 national and 2005 local elections suggests that violations were considerably higher in districts in which international observers were not present.  Indeed, opposition parties are convinced that the presence of such observers prevented substantial fraud in certain Punjabi districts during the second round of voting in 2005.  3.  (C) Domestic observation, which has been routine and widespread in Pakistani elections since the late 1980s, has demonstrated no similar deterrent effect.  In addition, many civil society groups, including the traditional leader in this field, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, are closely aligned with a single party, undermining the credibility of such groups when it comes to election observation.  Political parties and the Election Commission of Pakistan have consistently reiterated to post that a robust international observation effort is both desired and critical to provide parties and voters with confidence in the process.  4.  (U) Observation approaches to the next election should reflect an understanding of what worked and what did not work previously.  A major problem in the past has been the scope and mandate of international election observation.  Over the coming months, the international community needs to shape a monitoring effort that places teams under the auspices a of credible international organization in a significant number of representative districts.  Security issues (especially in FATA and parts of the NWFP and Baluchistan) and the vast size of the Pakistan electorate (Punjab province alone has a larger population than Germany, while Sindh,s population exceeds that of Spain or Poland) probably preclude universal coverage.  However, credible coverage must be based on the fact that observers are available to cover wide areas of both rural and urban Pakistan.  While teams would be organized by and under the auspices of international organizations, personnel in many cases would be from Pakistan.  5.  (U) While most attention understandably focuses on the day of elections, approaches to observations also need to ensure that the nomination and campaign process is also monitored.  In addition, efforts should be made to ensure an appropriate parallel vote tabulation (PVT) to supplement the observation.   (Note: PVT is a forecast or verification of electoral results based on actual observation of the vote count in statistically significant, randomly selected polling places; it is also called \"sample-based parallel vote tabulation\" or \"sample-based quick count,\" to distinguish it from \"comprehensive parallel vote tabulation\" or \"comprehensive quick count\" End Note).  This will provide independent verification of the results and help prevent fraud through changing election results, a frequent point of contention between political parties.   ISLAMABAD 00011883  002.2 OF 003   6.  (U) Finally, any effective approach to election observation must be truly international.  The worst thing would be for the U.S. alone to become too engaged or be seen as too far ahead of the rest of the international community. Indeed, the broader the international involvement, the more credible the observation effort - and, ultimately, the elections themselves.  We should contribute to the election observation process and we should help shape that process. But our efforts and engagement should be as part of a broader effort that involves other donors and other countries.  In this instance, the larger the donor pool, the better.  7.  (C) From our perspective, a single, coordinated monitoring initiative that is truly international in scope would reduce duplication, ensure donors issue similar conclusions and prevent allegations that the USG is bent on manipulating results to favor any particular side.  US-only observer missions are likely to face significant security and logistical challenges in addition to unpredictable political reactions locally. No single donor can or should bear the costs of the entire monitoring effort.  Similarly, we should if at all possible avoid a proliferation of ad hoc, fragmented monitoring activities, each sponsored by different entities and each offering wildly different perspectives, based on individual observations in only a few areas of the country.  8.  (U) The importance of coordination among counterparts and within the donor community cannot be stressed enough.  Other donors are contributing significant funding (on the order of $12 million) for election related training, including polling station staff and party workers.  Election observation programs rank second as an area of donor interest.  For this reason, the joint strategy covers areas not covered by other donors at this time, including preparing voter roles, providing some equipment and promoting engagement between the election commission and varous political parties.  9.  (U) Post has already expended considerable energy in working with the relevant donor working group in Islamabad to promote a coordinated approach, including in the area of election monitoring.  From our perspective, the best scenario would be for all donors to participate jointly in an accepted framework rather than acting unilaterally.  The next best approach would be to require that donor observers coordinate with and follow guidelines provided by the working group.  10.   (U) We have not received a firm commitment from any donor on this issue so far.  While some donors remain undecided about their plans for international monitoring, perhaps reflecting continued uncertainty about when elections will take place and how they will be managed, others are leaning towards efforts that exclusively involve their missions (e.g. the EU).  While dialogue at post will continue, we strongly believe it is important to also initiate those discussions among like-minded donors and other international partners, both in their headquarters office and in their meetings in Washington.  In particular, talking points provided below should be used when approaching key bilateral donors, including the UK, Canada, Australia, Japan, France, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Netherlands and Belgium as well as potential international donors such as the EU, UNDP and the Commonwealth.  11.  (U)  Suggested talking points aimed at pushing for a coordinated, streamlined and coherent approach to election monitoring follow below:  -- Upcoming Pakistan elections for national and provincial legislatures are a critical part of this nation,s democratic transition.  We have a shared interest in ensuring that these elections are free and fair and that the results are universally accepted by key political actors.  -- The United States is committed to providing considerable support for ensuring free and fair elections.  With few exceptions, this will be executed through international  ISLAMABAD 00011883  003.2 OF 003   non-governmental organizations and contractors.  -- Such support will help build confidence in the election process, both within opposition political parties and with the Pakistani population at large.  A strong commitment to a significant monitoring effort covering the nomination, campaign and voting process, coupled with a parallel vote tabulation, will help minimize electoral fraud from any direction.  It will also provide independent verification of the results.  -- An organized, coordinated international observation effort is vital.  From our perspective, a truly international effort will ensure credibility across all sides of the Pakistan political perspective.  -- We have previously discussed with your mission in Islamabad the need to ensure that any international monitoring effort is closely coordinated, with the activities of one initiative not undermining or duplicating the activities of another.  This is the only way to ensure widespread coverage and to avoid conflicts and contradictions in monitoring the elections, collecting data and assessing the results.  -- Ideally, all international donors could \"buy\" into a single, coordinated monitoring program. If this isn,t possible, at a minimum we would request that all donors insist that their funding is coordinated jointly with and follows guidance from the donor working group on elections established within the Islamabad donor community.  Such coordination is essential to ensure the effectiveness of the election-monitoring process.  -- The election date is fast approaching and significant preparatory efforts will be critical to ensure effective international monitoring specially if it is to be combined with domestic monitoring and parallel vote tabulation.  With this in mind, we request that you affirm your commitment to continuous coordination and a unified approach as the election process unfolds.  This will in turn allow all donors to move forward together in finalizing approaches, selecting monitoring mechanisms and beginning substantive preparations.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/27/2006 6:37", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 012211  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/26/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, AF, IN SUBJECT: AFGHAN AMBASSADOR ON FM SPANTA'S JUNE 23 VISIT TO ISLAMABAD  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and Introduction:  On June 25, Afghan Ambassador Tarzi offered poloff a read-out of foreign Minister Spanta's June 23 visit to Pakistan, his first bilateral foreign travel since assuming office.   While in Islamabad, Spanta was received by President Musharraf, Prime Minister Aziz and Foreign Minister Kasuri, who had personally invited Spanta to visit following their bilateral discussions on the margins of the June 19-21 OIC Ministerial in Baku. According to Tarzi, the themes of economic and security cooperation dominated all official meetings.  Although the meetings were cordial, neither side appeared satisfied with the other's response on two core issues:  for Afghanistan, cross-border terrorism; for Pakistan, the fear of India using Afghanistan as a base for nefarious operations in Balochistan and the Tribal Areas.  The parties agreed to a schedule of follow-up diplomatic and security meetings to build momentum for improved bilateral relations, but overcoming mutual suspicion and mistrust will clearly require substantial effort.  End summary and introduction.  2.  (C)  Tarzi characterized the meetings between FM Spanta as cordial, noting that the two foreign ministers appear to be developing a solid working relationship.  In addition to maintaining mil-mil contacts through Tripartite Commission mechanisms, the sides agreed to energize bilateral Pak-Afghan interaction through quarterly meetings of the Foreign Ministers and bi-monthly consultations between intelligence agencies.  Without disclosing much detail, Tarzi said that Spanta's talks with the Pakistani leaders included economic issues such as trade corridors with Central Asia and a potential Turkmenistan-Afghanistan gas pipeline, but discussion of Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs) was deferred for a future meeting.  (Note: Post has forwarded MFA press release no. 222 describing Spanta's visit to SCA/PB. End note.)  3.  (C) Tarzi became visibly excited when recounting a briefing by the Pakistan side objecting to the proliferation of Indian consulates and other official establishments in Afghanistan, an issue that figured prominently in all three of FM Spanta's official meetings.  According to Tarzi, the Pakistani side insisted that there are twelve (12) official Indian posts in Afghanistan, refusing to accept the Afghan's reassurance that India has been allowed to open only four (4) lightly-staffed consulates, two of which -- Kandahar and Jalalabad -- have served nearby Sikh and Hindu communities since Partition.  (Note:  Tarzi said that the two other Indian consulates -- Herat and Mazar-e-Sharif -- were opened in the early 1990s during the mujahideen government.  End note.)    Responding to Pakistani angst that Indian agents are using these diplomatic missions to launch mischief in Balochistan, the Afghan officials assured their hosts that Kabul will not allow India or other foreign elements to conduct anti-Pakistan operations from Afghan territory. That said, Spanta told the Pakistanis not to drag Afghanistan into its decade-long conflict with India-- a message that he repeated publically upon his return to Kabul.  (Note:  Tarzi confessed his personal frustration at his inability to disabuse the GOP of its misimpression regarding the nature and extent of the official Indian presence in Afghanistan, saying that Pakistani diplomats in Kabul are fully aware of the size and location of India's diplomatic missions.  Post is not surprised that the \"Indian consulate\" conspiracy took up much of Spanta's visit, as Pakistani interlocutors at every level subscribe to the theory.  End note.)  4.  (C)  Tarzi was also concerned that Pakistan's oft-voiced commitment to prevent cross-border terrorism will not translate into action.  Although FM Spanta received strong messages in each  meeting regarding Pakistan's resolve, Tarzi  ISLAMABAD 00012211  002 OF 002   said that the Afghans were looking for concrete results. When poloff pressed on what those results might be, Tarzi offered nothing more specific than saying that Kabul had been pleased by Pakistan's security cooperation during the 2004 presidential election.  When the Pakistani side raised its own concerns with terrorist/militants entering Pakistan from Afghanistan, Tarzi said that the Afghan side repeated its assurance that the Karzai government has no interest in destabilizing Pakistan.  Discussion during Spanta's visit did not specifically address the GOP's three-tiered strategy to stabilize the tribal areas along the Pak-Afghan border, although Tarzi suggested that this could be the subject of subsequent consulations.  5.  (SBU)  Post has sought appointments with MFA officials to gauge the Pakistani assessment of Spanta's visit, only to have its requests deferred until the conclusion of the MFA's annual Chief of Mission convocation on June 29.  6.  (C)  Comment:  Conveying skepticism regarding the GOP's commitment to improving bilateral relations, Tarzi speculated that FM Kasuri had quickly arranged Spanta's visit so that he could report that he had \"checked the box\" during his upcoming visit to Washington in July.   Tarzi was as quick to ascribe responsibility to (and insinuate direct support by) the GOP for Taliban and anti-Coalition militants crossing into Afghanistan as he was to distance the Karzai government from any responsibility for cross-border activity (whether sponsored by al Qaeda, the Taliban or India) in the other direction.   Overcoming these mutual suspicions and mistrust to energize this most recent rapprochement between Kabul and Islamabad will continue to require active USG engagement and counsel. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD11364|06STATE95397", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/27/2006 10:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 012261  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/25/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER SUBJECT: FOREIGN STUDENTS STUDYING IN PAKISTANI MADRASSAS  REF: A. STATE 95397      B. ISLAMABAD 11364  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On June 23, in response to our request of June 13 (Ref A and B), Minister of Interior Sherpao passed to Ambassador documents on AMCIT and other Westerners studying in Pakistani madrassas.  2.  (C)  The GOP package identified a total of 77 students from the United States and nine (9) European countries.  Of these 77, the documents state that 36 have been deported. The remaining 41 students are studying in nine (9) different institutions:  -- Madrassa Arabia Raiwind, Lahore:  Albania (6 students), the Netherlands (1), Macedonia (5), Portugal (1), Russia (5), Turkey (4), U.S. (2)  -- Madrassa al- Hasnain, Faisalabad:  Finland (1), Macedonia (1)  -- Madrassa Jamia Marryum Saddiquia, Rawalpindi:  France (2)  -- Dar-ul-Uloom al- Hussainia, Shadadpur:  France (3)  -- Madrassa Farooquia Madni Masjid Makan, Swat:  France (2)  -- Madoodi International Islamic Education Institute, Lahore:  Turkey (1)  -- Madrassa Arabia Zakria Masjid, Rawalpindi:  U.S. (1)  -- Jamiat ul-Uloom Islamia, Binori Town, Karachi:  UK (1)  -- Jamia Bunoria Site, Karachi:  U.S. (5)  3.  (C)  Of the nine madrassas listed above which still host foreign students, the Jamiat ul-Uloom Islamia Masjid in Karachi's Binori Town complex is the only institution on post's list of \"madrassas of concern.\"  The other madrassas identified by the GOP as hosting foreign students are not/not known to post as institutions with links to terrorist or extremist organizations.  4.  (C)  The GOP documents include separate lists, broken out by nationality, including students' names, passport number, name of host madrassa, and whether the student has been deported or is currently studying.  (Note:  Post will forward the complete package to SCA/PB to distribute to appropriate USG agencies/offices.  End note.)  5.  (C)  Comment:  The information above reports only on American and European madrassa students, consistent with the parameters of the USG query (Ref A and B).  The numbers reported above reflect less than a third of the estimated population of foreign students attending Pakistani madrassas.  The June 22 edition of the \"Daily Times\" reported that the Government of Pakistan informed the National Assembly on June 21 that 408 foreigners are currently studying in Pakistani madrassas.  According to this press account, the government reported that these students are from Afghanistan, Cambodia, China, Finland, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, The Maldives, Niger, Nigeria, Portugal, Qatar, Russia, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda and the United States. Post believes that the majority of these non-Western students are Afghans. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD12265", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/27/2006 11:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 012265  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: CONSENSUS ON ELECTION AND RECONCILIATION BEGINS OVER DINNER  ISLAMABAD 00012265  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker  1. (C) Summary.  The visit of elections expert Andrew Raucci provided a rare opportunity for a frank dinner discussion between senior representatives from most of Pakistan's key political parties: PML, PPP, PML-N/ARD, MQM and ANP. Raucci's comment about the critical need for credibility in the elections process sparked a vigorous debate and a significant level of consensus from a group normally accustomed to taking potshots at one another. The group moved closer to agreement on the need for free and fair elections, a level playing ground for all parties, a credible Election Commissioner and election process, a joint code of conduct, and tamping down political victimization. Yet, the fact that the leaders of three of five of the parties represented at the table are currently in exile (voluntarily or involuntarily) and that all five leaders have spent at least six months in jail for political reasons demonstrates the harsh zero-sum nature of Pakistani politics. It also hints at just how difficult it will be for the parties to implement the consensus reached at the table. End Summary.  Budgets and Balochistan Spawn the Party Line -------------------------------------------- 2. (SBU) A June 19 dinner hosted by Ambassador Crocker in honor of the visit of Illinois-based elections expert Andrew Raucci (part of a Public Affairs speaker series timed to coincide with the launch of US assistance for Pakistani elections) brought together senior party leaders Chaudhary Shujaat Hussain of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML), Iqbal Jhagra from the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy (ARD) and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N),  Raja Pervaiz Ashraf from the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP), Asfandyar Wali Khan from the Awami National Party (ANP), and Farooq Sattar from the MQM.  Party representatives--ordinarily accustomed to grandstanding during public meetings--used this rare private opportunity to discuss a range of policy issues.  3. (SBU)    The evening's discussions began with banter on the ongoing budget and quickly gave way to a heated discussion of provincial autonomy and Balochistan.  In particular, the ANP and MQM representatives expressed consternation that although two Senate Subcommittees met on Balochistan last year, none of the recommendations had been implemented. Chaudhary Shujaat--who has taken personal responsibility to negotiate with  Baloch nationalists for the Government--indicated that the recommendations of the first Subcommittee addressing political reform to resolve the current Baloch crisis were being implemented. (Note: Post has yet to see any concrete steps towards implementation, despite GOP assurances. End note).  Shujaat noted that SubCommittee on Constitutional Affairs, which was responsible for making legal (and constitutional) changes to allow for greater provincial autonomy, had stalled. Shujaat seemed open to Asfandayar Wali's suggestions that Shujaat personally intervene in re-starting the committee.  But, Talk of Elections Brings Consensus... ------------------------------------------ 4. (SBU)    Elections speaker Raucci began a lively dialogue on the upcoming election process (and problems with past elections) by noting that what was most needed in Pakistan's electoral process is credibility.  PML-N's Iqbal Jhagra quickly chimed in that it was hard to have credibility in the process without a level playing field for all parties.  Raja Pervaiz Ashraf noted that PPP's biggest concern was that there be a neutral caretaker government chosen by national consensus; that, and a level playing field would ensure credibility.  Asfandyar Wali at first balked at the idea that the Election Commission would be neutral--or credible--but conceded that if the ruling party took steps to prove their will to have fair elections, it was possible.  5.(C) One of the more heated discussions of the evening was  ISLAMABAD 00012265  002.2 OF 002   over the selection process for the new Election Commissioner. When the opposition said they wished the process had been more transparent, Shujaat sparked off a debate by claiming that he had solicited the advice of the \"leader of the opposition.\" (Note: A reference to MMA leader Fazl-ur Rehman, whose desegnation as \"leader of the opposition\" was in itself a subject of contentious debate. End note.) Asfandyar, Sattar, Ashraf, and Jhagra balked at the fact that they had not been looped in; Shujaat retorted that he had tried, but he could only do so much if the leader of the opposition chose not to share the information. (Note: Embassy PolOffs have been told by PPP, JI and JUI-F that their participation had been solicited and that they had suggested names, but that PPP would publicly deny this. End note). Overall, Chaudhary Shujaat--the target of much of the opposition's ire at the government's purported misdeeds--listened carefully to all of the complaints and suggestions and managed to convince listeners that he too, was genuinely concerned and interested in having a credible, fair elections process.  6. (SBU) One of the most poignant moments in the two-hour discussion was that political victimization was almost a universal \"norm\" in Pakistan.  To make this point to Dr. Raucci, the Ambassador asked for a \"show of hands\" by anyone at the table who had been jailed for political reasons: all of the participants indicated that they had spent at least 6 months in jail, with some sacrificing up to 5-7 years of their lives in the name of political struggle. This point --and the very open dialogue of the evening--eventually gave way to a near-consensus on several baseline criteria for credible elections in Pakistan: a free and fair process, a level playing ground for all parties, an Election Commission deemed credible, a joint code of conduct, and the need to avoid political victimization of their opposition in the future.  Comment ----------- 7. (C) The evening's debates highlighted once again for the Mission the value of USG efforts to help the Election Commission and GOP-at-large build public confidence in the electoral process.  It also demonstrated that the political parties appear ready for a new era in politics; the 2007-2008 election process will all but cement how that era turns out. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE97402", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/29/2006 7:16", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 012319  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, TBIO SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  BIOSAFETY AND PATHOGEN SECURITY  REF: A. STATE 97402       B. ISLAMABAD 3891      C. STATE 36489  On June 15, poloff delivered Ref A points to MFA (Americas) Director Diyar Khan.  Khan recalled post's earlier demarche on the topic (Ref B and C) and said that he would soon contact poloff with the Government of Pakistan (GOP) response.  On June 21, Khan advised poloff that he had forwarded the U.S. proposal to MFA (Disarmament) Director Muhammad Kamran Akhtar.  When poloff spoke with Akhtar on June 26, he said that he had distributed the USG proposal to the appropriate GOP agencies and was awaiting their input. He indicated that it could take up to two weeks before he has a consolidated response to share with the Embassy. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/30/2006 2:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 012389  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: FATA: TALKS AND TRUCES ON THE TABLE IN NORTH WAZIRISTAN   ISLAMABAD 00012389  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (C) Summary. Militants in North Waziristan on June 25 offered a one-month \"cease-fire\" on their deadly attacks on security forces and pro-government elders, if the Government of Pakistan (GOP) acquiesces on five demands. North Waziristan tribal elders re-iterated these demands during a June 27 jirga convened by the GOP's new Political Agent (PA) (and attended by over 500 tribesmen). A splinter group of militants perpetrated two deadly attacks on security forces that killed at least seven soldiers on June 26 and 27 in an apparent attempt to undercut the cease fire. With the cease-fire on the table, the GOP finds itself in a tough position, as it has encouraged negotiation and dialogue to restore peace. Acceding to the terms offered by militants will undermine GOP's efforts to seal the border and restore law and order, but not negotiating at all could bolster the cause of the militants. The GOP will have to carefully negotiate a compromise solution that addresses the concerns of the tribes but still allows room for improved law and order and border security. Separately, Interior Minister Sherpao has stressed that any negotiation would not change the government's posture towards \"foreigners\" and cross-border terrorism. End summary.   MILITANTS CALL CEASE FIRE; JIRGA BACKS THEM UP --------------------------------------------- - 2. (U) On June 25, North Waziristan (NW) militants--who have been attacking government and military installations and personnel since December 2005--offered a conditional one-month cease-fire through \"local Taliban\" spokesman Abdullah Farhad. Farhad's truce offer included five demands:  --Dismantling the 25 new checkposts established in recent months; --Sending FC and XI Corps troops back to their camps and reverting to the use of levy forces by July 26; --A complete pull out of Army troops from FATA within one month; --Releasing all militants captured during military/paramilitary operations since 2004; and --Re-instating tribal rights that have been revoked under FCR statutes (re-opening shops in closed markets, re-instating tribals in government jobs, and paying back-pay to those who were fired).  3. (U) At the behest of newly appointed NW Political Agent Fakhr-i Alam Irfan and NWFP Governor Orakzai, over 500 tribal elders attended the first session of a jirga intended to restore law and order in the Agency.  Tribal elders--represented by Jamaat-e Ulema-e Islam Fazlur Rahman (JUI-F) leader Maulana Abdur Rehman--reportedly reiterated several of the demands made by Taliban spokesman Farhad a day before. (Note: Per septel, JUI-F's central leadership  voiced opposition to the \"Taliban\" militants and worried about law and order in recent conversations with Poloffs. Maulana Rehman, according to contacts in NW, has a relationship with the Agency's \"Taliban\" militants and may be voicing both JUI-F and Taliban concerns. End Note.)  ATTACKS CONTINUE BUT MILITANTS SAY TRUCE STANDS --------------------------------------------- -- 4. (C) Less than a day after the cease-fire offer, militants launched two attacks on military installations in NW. After the first attack--a car bomb at a checkpost outside of Miram Shah on June 26 that killed seven soldiers and injured approximately 26 others--militants claiming to be a part of the local Taliban claimed responsibility. Militant \"spokesman\" Farhad immediately called news stations to deny responsibility, and accused government forces of attempting to derail the cease-fire. Oddly, Farhad called a BBC  ISLAMABAD 00012389  002.2 OF 002   correspondent a few hours later to change his story; he said that although one of his fellow militants may have been responsible, the cease-fire he announced would hold. Farhad has since continued to defend the attacks, claiming they were self-defense, and thus allowed under the terms of the cease-fire. In an attempt to regain control of the ceasefire, militant leaders distributed a pamphlets in Urdu throughout NW. An excerpt of the pamphlet, which was passed to us by a journalist in NW (and translated by our FSN) reads as follows: \"Everyone is informed that the NWA Mujahideen have announced a one-month truce with GOP...GOP functionaries can travel freely...maliks and elders can meet with GOP leaders and should play their role in negotiations between the Mujahideen and GOP...No Mujahid has the right to roam around masked on roads...anyone in violation of this announcement will be dealt with severely.\"  GOP PROCEEDING CAUTIOUSLY ------------------------- 5. (C) Both Governor Orakzai and the NW political agent have welcomed the cease-fire as a step in the right direction. Orakzai on June 26 reiterated to reporters that he would pursue negotiations with the militants, saying that they were a part of his overall strategy to reach a compromise with tribesmen and militants through negotiations. In what has been called a goodwill gesture by commentators, the North Waziristan Political Agent released 50 militants who had been captured during operations in FATA since 2004; the 50 were declared \"innocent\". Federal Government officials have been slow to weigh in publicly, but in a private conversation, Interior Minister Sherpao stressed that although the negotiations were taking place, the government would not compromise on its strict posture against \"foreigners\" or allow cross-border terrorism.  COMMENT ------- 6. (C) GOP officials appear to have learned from their earlier mistake of negotiating with South Waziristan militants without also negotiating with the tribal elders of the region. In this round, Orakzai plans to simultaneously appease tribesmen; if some of the tribal elders' wishes are met, the militants will have more difficulty buying their loyalty. Officials involved in the negotiations will have to strike a delicate balance between pacifying tribesmen and militants and maintaining the operational capacity to pursue terrorists and stem cross-border infiltration. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/30/2006 4:14", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 012391  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 25X1-HUMAN TAGS: PTER, PGOV, KISL, PK SUBJECT: FATA: PAKISTANI TALIBAN THREATEN JUI-F INTERESTS  ISLAMABAD 00012391  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (S/NF) Summary:  Senior officials from the Islamist Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) report increasing concern over the influence and activities of Pakistani Taliban sympathizers in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), border areas of Balochistan, and certain districts in the North West Frontier Province (NWFP).  This is in contrast with the tactical alliance that still exists between some JUI-F members and Afghan Taliban in Quetta.  Pakistani Taliban sympathizers are increasingly challenging JUI-F (and their sympathetic Deobandi clerics) for religious, political and, in some cases, administrative control of conservative border districts.  Officials contend that Pakistani Taliban sympathizers have been angered by JUI-F's failure to stem military and law enforcement actions against them and by its willingness to cooperate politically with the GOP.  In some cases, JUI-F officials, their family members, and Deobandi clerics have been directly threatened with violence from Pakistani Taliban sympathizers.  JUI-F asserted that they had been placed on the \"front line\" in the fight against Taliban extremism and that their party offered the only viable alternative to conservative Pashtun tribal elements.  They sought USG support in pressing the GOP to cooperate more fully with JUI-F and Deobandi clerics in seeking a negotiated end to the current stalemate in the Waziristans as a first step towards countering this trend.  Information in this report is based on private conversations with reliable Embassy contacts at senior levels of the JUI-F, who remain extremely concerned about their personal safety.  End Summary.  Background  2. (S/NF) JUI-F and the Taliban have a long, often confrontational relationship.  While both draw their political ideology and religious theology from Deobandi roots, their specific interpretation of the tradition have long been at odds.  While these two conservative Islamist movements found common cause in the Afghan jihad (both against the Soviets and the Northern Alliance), JUI-F was often publicly critical of the excesses of its Afghan neighbor and tolerated only a limited political presence of the Taliban in areas of Pakistan under JUI-F influence. Post-9/11 JUI-F pressured the Taliban to hand over al-Qaeda suspects to the United States and failing to win its case, ended formal support to its ideological rival.  With the advent of Operation Enduring Freedom, JUI-F publicly criticized United States' action but privately admitted the Taliban's complicity in its own demise.  Tacit Understanding  3. (S/NF) With the influx of Afghan Taliban and their Pakistani sympathizers across the border, JUI-F struck a tacit understanding designed to protect its political interests in FATA, Balochistan, and NWFP.  According to senior JUI-F officials, JUI-F agreed to press for allowing a non-militarized Taliban/Taliban sympathizer presence in these areas in exchange for Taliban recognition of JUI-F religious and political supremacy.  With the GOP decision to introduce the army into FATA, JUI-F's ability to negotiate effectively between the GOP, the resident tribes, and Pakistani Taliban sympathizers consistently diminished.  At the same time, JUI-F officials claim, the Taliban and their initially small group of sympathizers developed an increasingly strong following, particularly in North and South Waziristan, as the security situation diminished and collateral damage from army and Frontier Corps operations affected the lives of the local populace.  An influx of displaced from the Waziristans into bordering areas of NWFP and Balochistan also ostensibly increased sympathy for the Taliban cause among local populace  ISLAMABAD 00012391  002.2 OF 003   in these districts.  Despite this break with Pakistani Taliban sympathizers from FATA, elements of the JUI-F in Quetta still retain close ties with Afghan Taliban.  Threatening JUI-F Interests  4. (S/NF) JUI-F officials claimed that over the last year, the growing pool of Pakistani Taliban sympathizers has clearly articulated its intention to overturn any previous understanding with the JUI-F.  While officials were unable to pinpoint a specific event, one speculated that the JUI-F's decisions not to protest vigorously the appointment of a perceived hard-line Peshawar Corps Commander in late 2005 and Governor in May 2006 were at least in part behind the growing rift.  JUI-F officials claim that Pakistani Taliban sympathizers have made clear to JUI-F officials in NWFP and Balochistan that it will no longer accept JUI-F political and religious domination.  Taliban sympathizers criticize JUI-F's decision to operate within the Pakistani political system, its general rejection of violence, and its coalition government with Musharraf's Pakistan Muslim League in Balochistan.  JUI-F officials report that Pakistani Taliban sympathizers feel the party has been inadequately strident in pressing for a negotiated settlement in FATA and blame the party's approach for the deteriorating security situation in North and South Waziristan.  5. (S/NF) According to JUI-F officials, Pakistani Taliban sympathizers are using a combination of pressure tactics and force to exert their influence in North and South Waziristan; the northern Balochistan districts of Zhob, Musakhel, Killa Saifullah, Pishin, and Killa Abdullah; and the NWFP districts of Tank, Dera Ismael Khan, and Bannu -- all areas in which the JUI-F has been politically powerful and religiously dominant.  JUI-F officials corroborate journalists' reports of expanding authority of Pakistani Taliban sympathizers' in North and South Waziristan.  They also point out that many of the so-called pro-government tribal and religious leaders who have been killed were actually JUI-F sympathizers.  6. (S/NF) In Balochistan, JUI-F officials claim that Pakistani Taliban sympathizers have used a combination of threats, intimidation, and outright violence to force local JUI-F politicians and religious leaders from the districts of Zhob and Musakhel.  They also report these sympathizers are periodically occupying government offices in parts of these districts and establishing parallel law and order administrative systems. Threats have also reportedly increased in the neighboring Killa Saifullah, Pishin, and Killa Abdullah districts, and JUI-F fears that outright violence may follow.  7. (S/NF) In NWFP, JUI-F leaders report that a similar pattern has emerged in Bannu, Tank, and Dera Ismael Khan districts -- areas that border the Waziristans and are home to several prominent JUI-F politicians, including leader Fazl-ur-Rehman.  Religious leaders and local JUI-F politicians have been forced from these areas, and alternative Taliban-inspired law and order systems are emerging in some tehsils.  One JUI-F source claimed that Rehman was worried that Taliban sympathizers might back alternative candidates in the upcoming elections and causing him and other JUI-F NWFP leaders to lose their seats.  Casting Blame  8. (S/NF) JUI-F officials claimed that the party was actively pressing the GOP to respond to the threats emanating from Pakistani Taliban sympathizers.  Its leaders attribute their present difficulties to U.S. pressure on the GOP to take an unnecessarily aggressive posture in Waziristan.  JUI-F  ISLAMABAD 00012391  003.2 OF 003   continues to believe that a negotiated deal with Taliban sympathizers in these areas is the best way forward and has thrown its full support behind the new NWFP Governor's tribal jirgas.  JUI-F officials also believed that increased GOP law enforcement and administrative action to counter rising threats in the settled areas is essential.  JUI-F wants GOP political support in this regard, arguing that its local officials and clerics offer the only viable alternative to the Taliban in these conservative areas.  Vilifying JUI-F only plays into the Taliban strategy.  In addition, one JUI-F official directly linked increased Taliban activity with its rival Deobandi party, the JUI-S, arguing that while JUI-S leader Sami-ul-Haq has publicly supported the GOP, he and other JUI-S leaders and clerics retain close ties with the Taliban.  Comment  9. (S/NF) JUI-F is clearly engaged in a competition with Pakistan Taliban sympathizers for religious and political domination in FATA, the bordering areas of NWFP, and northern Balochistan.  The party has determined that such sympathizers are antithetical to its political interests and is clearly looking for a formula that will contain their influence without expanding GOP influence in these isolated areas. JUI-F's solution of direct negotiations with Taliban sympathizers is dubious, as GOP negotiations with such groups (as distinct from tribal leaders) were, at least in part, responsible for rising Taliban influence in South Waziristan.  While the JUI-F split with Pakistani Taliban emmanating from the FATA seems clear, elements of the party still retain close ties with Afghan Taliban fighters engaged in cross-border infiltration from Quetta, despite JUI-F claims to the contrary.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/3/2006 12:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 012517  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/03/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KISL, KWMN, PK SUBJECT: END OF THE HUDOOD ORDINANCES?  REF: ISLAMABAD  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, b and d  1. (C/NF) Summary: Following a two month public awareness campaign, President Musharraf on July 1 instructed the Council on Islamic Ideology (CII) to prepare a revised Hudood Ordinance for review and adoption by August.  In addition, the President announced his intention to sign an order on July 3 dictating the release of all women currently in detention save on charges of murder, robbery, or terrorism. A senior contact at the CII confirmed receipt of the President's instructions and noted that the guidelines received from the President's office included elimination of adultery provisions, differentiation in the weight of testimony based on religion and gender, and substantial refinements to the rape provisions of the law.  While the CII was not/not pleased to receive direction from the President, our contact reported that its leaders intended to comply and should have a revised provision prepared for review in August.  End Summary.  2. (SBU) President Musharraf convoked a meeting of senior government officials on July 1 to review women's issues and law reforms.  The meeting followed a two month campaign spearheaded by the Women's Affairs Ministry designed to raise awareness on the Hudood Ordinances and develop a constituency for their reform.  During the course of the meeting, President Musharraf issued two separate directives, which were later provided to the media.  The first instructed the CII, a constitutional body with representation from all five Islamic sects, to draft a revised Hudood Ordinance for review and adoption by the end of August.  In the press statement released, the revised ordinance was to eliminate discriminatory provisions against women, while at the same time adhering to Islamic injunctions.  The second directive called on the Minister of Law, Justice, and Human Rights to draft an order for Musharraf's signature on July 3 that would release all women prisoners, save those detained for robbery, murder, or terrorism.  This will result in the release of all women detainees/prisoners under the current Hudood Ordinances.  3. (C/NF) According to a senior researcher at the CII, the instructions they received from the Office of the President were very explicit.  The CII is to draft a consensual document that eliminates adultery provisions from the Hudood Ordinances, gives testimony by all witnesses equal weight, and allows normal evidentiary standards in rape cases brought under the new ordinance.  In addition, the new ordinance will prohibit any government official or private citizen from attempting to bring criminal charges against a rape victim. The CII had during its last meeting in April unanimously called for similar changes to the Hudood Ordinances, so the drafting of a consensual document should be relatively easy. However, CII members are reportedly angered by Musharraf's unparalleled directive approach in this matter, fearing that it will compromise the independence of the CII, which is constitutionally separate from the Office of the President.  4. (C/NF) Comment:  The GOP has invested considerable effort in attempting to build a constituency for reform of the Hudood Ordinances.  While Islamist politicians and conservative clerics are likely to challenge this decision, Musharraf's now public commitment to a reform timeline and the immediate injunctive relief being offered to women detainees signal the GOP's intention to proceed.  Having the CII take charge of drafting a revised ordinance will undercut Islamist arguments against any such document.  Despite its current reformist make-up, the CII is still popularly seen as the final arbiter of Islamic thought and guardian of Islamic law.  Public criticism of a CII document carries inherent risks for clerics, which may well stifle opposition to the new law.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE106562", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/5/2006 13:28", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 012688  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  G-77 AND UN MANAGEMENT REFORM  REF: STATE 106562  On June 30, 2006, poloff delivered reftel points and a copy of the draft U.S. resolution on UN management reform to MFA (UN) Saadia Ashraf Khan.  Khan thanked poloff for the presentation, accepted the draft resolution and said that she would convey the Embassy's points to senior MFA officials as well as Pakistan's UN delegation. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/5/2006 13:34", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 012689  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  S-ES/O - PLEASE PASS TO EMBASSY KABUL POL-MIL OFFICER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, MASS SUBJECT: PAKISTAN MANPADS COLLECTION PROGRAM:  JULY 3 FIELD VISIT TO BALOCHISTAN  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable contains an action request:  please see paragraph 5.  2.  (S)  On July 3, 2006, poloff and PM/WRA Kabul-based EOD contractor Drew Prater flew to Quetta, Balochistan to assist Government of Pakistan (GOP) Ministry of Interior (MOI) program manager COL Abbas and field manager COL Saeed conduct an X-ray examination of items collected by the Balochistan Frontier Corps in April 2006.  The consignment (Balochistan FC No. 304) included:  -- six (6) missiles -- one (1) gripstock -- ten (10) batteries  Prater confirmed COL Saeed's determination that all items in this consignment are genuine.  The Balochistan Frontier Corps will retain custody of these items until arrangements can be made for disposal.  (Note:  Post has requested that the disposal date be scheduled in early September and that Prater return from Afghanistan to witness the destruction, per the Embassy's agreement with the GOP.  End note.)  3.  (S)  As this was the first consignment since the USG authorized the transfer of USD 100,000 in seed money In November 2005 to underwrite the resumption of collection activities, as well as the first consignment collected since the USG had transferred an X-ray system to the GOP in October 2005 to verify the authenticity of collected items, COL Abbas and COL Saeed requested that an USG EOD expert also examine the consignment to confirm that the GOP collection team was operating the X-ray system and analyzing its photos correctly.  The colonels were exercising an additional degree of caution this first time out with the X-ray system, as payment to the collecting agency depends on the MOI's certification of authenticity as a control against payment for counterfeit items.  (Note:  The colonels are extremely wary of falling into a situation in which they are forced to re-coup payment from a collecting agency for an item that later proves to be a counterfeit.  End note.)  Under the terms of the MOI's current agreement with its collection agencies (ISI and Frontier Corps in North West Frontier Province; Frontier Corps in Balochistan), COL Abbas will not/not release payment to the collecting agency until COL Saeed has verified the authenticity of the collected items with the X-ray system.   Following COL Saeed's July 3 certification that the items in Consignment No. 304 are genuine, MOI will transfer payment to the Balochistan Frontier Corps.  4.  (S)  Both COL Abbas and COL Saeed are confident that Balochistan Frontier Corps have identified other items available for collection, which they expect to come in soon after the field teams receive payment for the items in Consignment No. 304.  The colonels' outlook for collections in North West Frontier Province remains pessimistic, as poor security conditions severely limit the mobility of field collections teams operating in the tribal areas.  5.  (S)  Action Request:  This one consignment was valued at USD 54,000 (USD 7500/missile, USD 7500/gripstock and USD 100/battery), more than half of the USD 100,000 seed money transferred to the GOP in November 2006.  Post requests that PM/WRA begin to prepare the paperwork for the next infusion of seed money, so that post can facilitate a quick transfer of funds should that become necessary.  Additionally, as the GOP program managers have already met and worked with EOD contractor Drew Prater, post requests that PM/WRA make arrangements with his employer so that he will be available for follow-up visits and consultations.  Post believes that continuity in contacts between GOP and USG personnel is important to establishing trust and rebuilding momentum in the collections program. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD12406", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/6/2006 5:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 012740  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/03/2016 TAGS: MOPS, PGOV, PK, PTER SUBJECT: PAKISTANI OFFICIALS, JOURNALISTS DISCUSS DEVELOPMENTS IN THE TRIBAL AREAS WITH VISITING S/CT DELEGATION  REF: ISLAMABAD 12406  Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY: DERIVED FROM DSCG 05-01, B, D  1.  (c) Summary: Visiting S/CT DAS Virginia Palmer, Chief S/CT Strategist David Kilcullen and SCA DAS John Gastright met June 22-24 in Islamabad and Peshawar with a range of officials and journalists to review developments in Pakistan's troubled tribal region.  All interlocutors, whether civilian or military, in government or in the media agreed that (1) a multitiered strategy -- addressing security, political and development needs -- was essential; (2) that of these three areas, political and development initiatives should take priority; (3) that stabilizing the area would require strengthening, for the time being, traditional tribal and administrative structures, not replacing them and (4) that in this context the key need was to establish clear lines of authority, running from the tribes through the maliks and political agents and ultimately to the NWFP Governor.  While there was broad consensus on the nature of the challenge and how to address it, there was less evidence of coordination among the government agencies involved.  The delegation's meeting with Minister of Interior Sherpao is reported reftel. This is a joint Consulate Peshawar- Embassy Islamabad cable. End Summary.  Sahibzada Imtiaz, Advisor to the Prime Minister on FATA --------------------------------------------- -----------  2.  (c) Sahibzada Imtiaz, who had taken the lead in developing the Government's overall political strategy for the FATA, made it clear that having developed the plan, he was very much in the back seat when it came to implementation.  NWFP Governor Orakzai was the focal point for implementation, he said, not only for development and political matters but also on security strategy -- though tactics would be left to the army. Imtiaz blamed the instability in the FATA largely on a weakening over time of the traditional lines of authority; it was important that clear lines be reestablished.  The Governor should be the focal point with an empowered cadre of Political Agents reporting directly to him. The Governor should also be the focal point for the planned tribal jirgas, which could only succeed if they were inclusive and representative of tribal interests and figures.  3.  (c) Imtiaz stressed that the key on the economic side was to take account of the region's natural and human resources.  The region had resources, he said, especially mineral resources, but it was essential to create an enabling environment for private sector investment.  He expected U.S.-sponsored Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs) could catalyze additional investment. Imtiaz anticipated that the Government would issue a development masterplan, targeting key sectors that needed additional investment.  The new FATA Development Authority would take the lead.  BG Nasser and DGMO Pasha ------------------------  4.  (c) Brig. General Nasser (Director of Military Operations for the Pakistan Army) briefed the delegation on developments in the FATA, surveying recent history, insurgent strategies and the Pakistan Army's evolving response.  The army was now moving away from cordon and search operations, he explained, and was using \"snap\" operations -- smaller lighter units that could be deployed against targets and withdrawn quickly.  The army was using night operations more, and was focusing heavily on improved training.  5.  (c) Nasser frankly admitted that the obstacles were daunting.  The physical terrain was challenging and the local population included refugees, religious leaders and deeply suspicious tribesmen.  The popularity of the Pakistan military had declined at the national level, and the relationship with the local population in the Tribal Areas was \"in the minus\" due in part to collateral damage from Pakistani attacks.  A villager's new road was more than offset by the new grave for his brother, Nasser  ISLAMABAD 00012740  002 OF 004   observed.  Moreover, military checkpoints were demeaning to a proud people.  It was time to pay more attention to political solutions and economic development, and rely less on the military he concluded.  In particular, it was important that any political process include local tribal leaders and give them a sense of ownership.  6.  (c) Nasser bridled at suggestions that Pakistan was not doing enough in the war on terror, pointing to the number of casualties suffered by the army and underscoring that Pakistan understood its political and economic interests in a stable Afghanistan:  \"When you say we are not doing enough,\" we say \"go to hell.\"  In a follow-on session, Director General of Military Operations MG Ahmed Shujat Pasha, picked up on this theme, observing that critical comments of U.S. officials, as picked up by the Afghan press, had been extremely hurtful. While he understood that the comments had been taken out of context, nonetheless they had fed perceptions that the U.S.-Pakistan relationship was strained.  Peshawar Journalists --------------------  7.  (c) In a wide-ranging conversation, the bureau chiefs of The Nation, Mashriq, NNI, Dawn, and Express, opined that the only areas in the FATA that were problematic were those that bordered trouble spots in Afghanistan.  Khyber, Mohmand, Orakzai and Kurram Agencies were relatively peaceful, though the last suffered from sectarian violence.  Bajaur Agency was a potential trouble spot.  8.  (c) They maintained the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA), the religious, six-party coalition that governs the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), had downplayed the Talibanization of North and South Waziristan, and it's spillover effect into the settled areas.  Unless the Pak-Afghan border were completely sealed, problems would continue and possibly spread.  The troubles in these agencies had been exacerbated by a shift in power to the \"mosque.\"  Historically, religious leaders (\"mullahs\") played a secondary role to traditional tribal leaders (\"maliks\"), but after the commencement of the Soviet-Afghan war, a power shift began that had continued for the last twenty-five years, with the religious leaders ascending over the maliks.  According to the journalists, for the region to be stable, the traditional leaders must be re-empowered.  Khyber Political Agent Tashfeen Khan ------------------------------------  9.  (c) Khyber Political Agent (PA) Tashfeen Khan, who previously served as the Development Secretary at the FATA Secretariat, conceded the political administration had  SIPDIS \"broken down\" in North and South Waziristan, but asserted the civil governance of other agencies continued to work well.  Khan identified development as the immediate problem in the FATA and he recommended concentrating on three areas: 1) developing the resource potential of the mineral industry; 2) agriculture development which would require consolidation of land, flood protection, and water resource management; and 3) developing human resources, since 40-50% of the FATA population is under the age of twenty.  Khan conceded the GOP lacked the expertise to implement new ideas and was not capable of industrializing the FATA.  He stressed the need for GOP capacity building measures and stated that once the U.S. demonstrated its commitment to FATA development, other stakeholders would show similar resolve.  Khan also emphasized the development of trade linkages with Afghanistan, claiming there were seven better Pak-Afghan trade routes than the Khyber Pass.  10.  (c) Khan asserted that Governor Orakzai's plan to convene a loya jirga (grand council of elders) to address the Waziristan security situation was likely to be far more successful than Pakistani Army operations.  In general, the Frontier Corps should be used in the FATA when military action was required.  Like the journalists, Khan advocated strengthening the maliks and lowering the status of the mullahs.  The latter had increased their power due to the Afghan war, failure of the GOP to respond properly to FATA  ISLAMABAD 00012740  003 OF 004   issues, and the imposition of adult franchise in the region.  The push for devolution, local governance, and the creation of the All Agency FATA Councilors Alliance had created parallel power structures that diluted the power of the maliks.  \"You can't impose a new system without understanding the old system.  If you want to change it, wipe out the old but you can't have half and half.  You have to strengthen the old and then gradually, over time, move forward with step-by-step changes,\" said Khan.  After greater development in the region, the people \"will decide for themselves what changes they want, we shouldn't impose our views on them.\"  11.  (c) Khan also agreed with a suggestion that the Political Agents be given more training, possibly at western universities.  He conceded the quality of PAs had decreased over time, but blamed it on constant experimentation within the Pakistani civil service.  The best and brightest Pakistanis no longer sought jobs in the civil bureaucracy, but instead took more lucrative jobs in finance or with international NGOs. The prospect of western training would add prestige to the position and help the government attract better political agents.  In addition to training, Khan stressed that the authority of the PA needed to be restored, including command over the civil authority, development projects, and having operational control of the Frontier Corps.  FATA Secretariat Chief Secretary Arbab Shahzad --------------------------------------------- -  12.  (c) FATA Secretariat Chief Secretary Arbab Shahzad maintained that his organization would be strengthened in the coming months based on the plan put forward by Sahibzada Imtiaz.  However, admitted that Minister of Industries and Special Initiatives Jehangir Tareen's economic development proposal had not yet been discussed with the FATA Secretariat. The agency had not had any deliberations with the federal government regarding Tareen's plan and Shahzad was unaware of any implementation schedule for the proposal.  13.  (c) Shahzad hoped that the FATA Development Agency (FATA DA) would be in place within six weeks, once approved by the Governor and President Musharraf. An autonomous agency, the FATA DA would be responsible for implementing all development projects in the tribal region, focusing on skill development, mineral and industrial development (including Reconstruction Opportunity Zones), and the creation of rural support programs.  SAFRON would no longer be the principal accounting officer for FATA expenditures, but an Additional Chief Secretary in the Governor's office would assume that role.  Echoing Sahibzada Imtiaz, Shazad welcomed this change as a necessary corrective to previously diffuse authority structures.  14.  (c) Shahzad shared the Khyber PA's views that the Waziristan security situation required strengthening the political administration, and re-establishing the credibility of the political agents.  The tribals had lost confidence in the current political administration and it would take years to rebuild it.  Inspector General of the Frontier Corps Major General Alam Khattak --------------------------------------------- --------------  15.  (c) Inspector General of the Frontier Corps (FC), Major General Alam Khattak, reviewed the status of his 36,000 force, noting they man 600 posts and guard a 1200 kilometer border.  In the north, the FC was on \"high vigilance alert\" and has had some problems in Bajaur. Khattak expressed his gratitude for the assistance from the U.S. forces in Kunar, on the Afghan side.  In Kurram Agency, the problems were primarily sectarian in nature, occasionally resulting in violence.  16.  (c) Khattak sought to counter the common perception that Pakistani security forces were losing the battle in North and South Waziristan.  To the contrary, because of the military operations in South Waziristan over the last few years, there was now a measure of control and greater  ISLAMABAD 00012740  004 OF 004   stability in the agency.  In North Waziristan, Khattak stated, the FC had just completed a high operational cycle that he deemed \"successful.\"  He conceded that North Waziristan was still violent, but the militants were increasingly frustrated as demonstrated by the evolution of their tactics.  Originally they attacked FC pickets, then used ambushes, switched to IEDs and now were using suicide bombers.  The militants had lost key commanders, lacked money and ammunition, and their morale was suffering.  With the militants on the run, Khattak stressed the need to revive \"the political process.\"  The political administration must be restored, reducing the influence of the mullahs, and a comprehensive development strategy introduced.  17.  (u) Visiting S/CT del did not have an opportunity to clear this cable.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE111144", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/6/2006 12:34", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 012773  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, KN, PARM, KNNP, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: RESPONSE TO NORTH KOREAN MISSILE LAUNCHES  REF: STATE 111144  1.  Polcouns delivered reftel demarche July 6 to Imran Haider, Deputy Director of Disarmament at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Haider alluded to Foreign Minister Kasuri's July 6 comments in Paris, in which Kasuri characterized the North Korean missile launches as \"a most unfortunate development.\"  2. Tariq Osman Hyder, Additional Secretary for UN Affairs at the MFA subsequently called to follow up on the demarche to Haider (his subordinate).  Hyder observed that Pakistan had always supported the 1994 Framework Accord and a nuclear weapons free North Korea.  Pakistan also opposed any steps that increased tensions in the Korean peninsula, and it supported the six party talks.  With respect to specific points made in the demarche, Hyder said that Pakistan was not a member of the Security Council and had limited scope to influence developments there (i.e., to support a \"strong, united Security Council response\").  With respect to trade, Hyder stated that Pakistan had no technology transfers with North Korea relating to missile technology or WMD and that to his knowledge there was no trade between the two countries, although he recalled that Pakistan had provided 25,000 tons of rice during the famine. Hyder noted that Kasuri was not the only Pakistani public figure to comment on the missile launch.  Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, speaking on June 6 to reporters in Geneva, had also expressed concern about North Korea's action, noting that Pakistan opposed any actions that increased uncertainty and tension.  3. Note: The press reports cited by the MFA quote Foreign Minister Kasuri as saying: \"We know that proliferation is a major international concern....When you are talking of firing missiles, we have never been accused of having supplied that technology anywhere -- so I can't take responsibility....\" Pakistan had \"upgraded all its mechanisms\" and was \"following the world's best practices on nonproliferation.\" Kasuri is also reported to have expressed support for the six party talks as the best way to tackle concerns over North Korea's military ambitions. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06SECSTATE109355", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/7/2006 5:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 012829  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: GUANTANAMO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARD PROCEEDINGS  REF: SECSTATE 109355  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, for reasons 1.4 (b,d)  1.  (C)  On July 6, Poloff delivered reftel points to the MFA Director for Americas, Diyar Khan.  Khan recognized the name of the Pakistani detainee (RABBANI, ABDUL AL-RAHIM GHULAM, US9PK-001460DP) and said that Rabbani has been identified as a Pakistani national.  Khan took note of the thirty day window to collect information to pass on to the Administrative Review Board and said he would coordinate immediately with the GOP Ministry of Interior to meet that deadline. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD12517", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/12/2006 9:39", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 013344  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/12/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: WOMEN'S RIGHTS: ONE STEP FORWARD, MORE IN THE OFFING  REF: ISLAMABAD 12517  ISLAMABAD 00013344  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (C/NF) Summary. Minister of Women's Development Sumaira Malik's campaign to improve the state of women's rights in Pakistan won its second battle on June 8, when President Musharraf signed an Ordinance into law that will release nearly 1300 women from prison. The Ordinance orders women currently awaiting trial in jail because they did not originally qualify for bail to be released, as long as they are not charged with murder, terrorism, or major financial fraud. Women arrested in the future on any crime except these three felonies will be immediately released on bail. Malik called the law a huge first step, and outlined three further legal changes she hopes to oversee: repealing or amending the Hudood law (Ref A), closing a major loophole in the Honor Killing law (ref B), and drafting a new domestic violence ordinance.  ORDINANCE FREES 1300 WOMEN -------------------------- 2. (U) President Musharraf on June 8 signed into law an Ordinance that frees approximately 1300 women currently imprisoned awaiting trial for minor crimes because they did not qualify for bail. The Ordinance also modifies the Criminal Procedure Code by ordering the release on bail of all women who are arrested, as long as they have not been charged with murder, terrorism, or major financial fraud. Human rights activists and lawyers estimate that the majority of those released will be women charged with petty-theft, minor narcotics infractions, or crimes under the Hudood Ordinance. (Note:  The Hudood law, enacted by General Zia regime in the 1970s, applies harsh Shari'a-based procedures and penalities for crimes such as rape and adultery; it is particularly discriminatory against women.  End note.)  By Monday June 10, 94 women in Punjab had been released. Reporting from the other three provinces has been spotty; the full release of all of the women who qualify for release may take a week or two.  3. (U) The Ordinance, pushed through by Women's Development Minister Sumaira Malik to win over detractors to her proposed amendments to the Hudood law, has garnered support from all sides. Human Rights Commission chairperson Asma Jehangir said that the Ordinance would provide great relief to female prisoners currently under trial (or awaiting trial).  Malik told Poloff that MMA female legislators--including Samia Raheel Qazi, daughter of Islmic fundamentalist political leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed--supported the Ordinance because it upholds Islamic norms of women's honor.  4. (U) Some lawyers and activists, such as senior advocate Dr. Aslam Khaki, expressed concern that women who were being released from prison would be disowned by their families and have no where to go.  Women's Affairs Minister Sumaira Malik allayed these fears when questioned by PolOff, by saying that the Women's Affairs Ministry would provide shelter for those in need.  ONLY THE BEGINNING, SAYS MALIK ------------------------------ 5. (C/NF) Malik told Emboffs during a June 11 meeting that she is upbeat about the prospects of changing the laws governing womens rights. The Ordinance releasing women from prison is only the first part of an ambitious, yet carefully designed agenda Malik laid out for Emboffs. Over the past two months, Malik has overseen a campaign to change public opinion on the Hudood law (ref A); Malik now expects that there will be major revisions to Hudood--or possibly a complete repeal--by September or October.  Next, Malik plans  ISLAMABAD 00013344  002.2 OF 002   to tighten last year's Honor Killings law, which while far-reaching, left open a major loophole that allowed the families of honor killings victims to \"forgive\" the perpetrator, ensuring that they would escape prosecution. Malik also hopes to initiate a public information campaign and draft new legislation on domestic violence in coming months.  COMMENT ------- 6. (C/NF) Sumaira Malik has wasted no time during her short two-month tenure as Women's Affairs Minister to drive through critically needed legal reforms. Malik clearly understands the problems her predecessors have faced in bringing about changes to Hudood and Honor Killings laws. She has been savvy in building public support, and painting her proposed amendments as completely in line with Islamic law. Her clearly-laid out public information strategy has included extensive use of news media, as well as outreach to village men and women. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE78514", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/12/2006 10:08", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 013345  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2030 TAGS: ASIG, ASEC, PK SUBJECT: UPDATE: SECURITY INSPECTION OF EMBASSY ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (REPORT NUMBER ISP/S-05-35A, AUGUST 2005)  REF: STATE 78514  Classified By: DSCG-05-1, G  (SBU) 1. Below are the updates to the 6 remaining OIG formal security recommendations that were listed \"resolved/open\" and requested responses in Reftel A.  (SBU) Recommendation 3 Update: Embassy Islamabad is still coordinating with DS/IP and CDO to provide continuity of management of the security programs. Post recently received a TDY A/RSO that will provide coverage for the Lahore consulate because the incumbent is scheduled to leave post early due to family medical reasons.  All other current A/RSOs will have at least one week overlap with their successors.  Status: Completed.  (SBU) Recommendation 10 Update: The proposed installation of a hardline door in the Lahore consulate is a part of an OBO security upgrade project that is now scheduled to be completed in FY 07.  Status: Unresolved.  (SBU) Recommendation 13 Update: Action OBO.  (SBU) Recommendation 16 Update: RSO Lahore has identified a new self-contained screening facility in New Delhi, India which will be shipped to the consulate in late August/early September.  Status: Unresolved.  (C/NF) Recommendation 17 Update:  OBO surveyed the Consulate General Karachi Marine residence in June and is currently awaiting funding to install new hardline doors.  Status: Unresolved.  (SBU) Recommendation 21 Update: Mission Islamabad Narcotics Affairs Section in conjunction with Karachi Consulate RSO is reviewing numerous options to improve the security and living conditions at the Quetta NAS residential compound.  Post expects a solution by September 30, 2006.  Status: Unresolved. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/12/2006 13:41", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 013376  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/12/2016 TAGS: KWMN, PHUM, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: MUKHTARAN MAI: ACCUSATIONS OF FAMILY MEMBERS ABUSING OF POWER  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (S/NF) A range of credible NGO contacts have confirmed to post serious problems within the local community being instigated by Mukhtaran's family in her home district of Mianwalli.  These six well-respected Pakistani NGOs, including Strengthening Participatory Organizations, Pattan, and Awaz Community Development, are all well-known to the Embassy and have ongoing programs in Mukhtaran's district. These once-strong Mukhtaran supporters claim that, due to her international celebrity and significantly increased donor-provided resources, she and her family have become significant power brokers in their local community.  Her brother, Hazoor Bakhsh, has become involved in local politics on behalf of the family and is now accorded the same respect as traditional tribal elders.  While the civil society community initially viewed Mukhtaran's increased involvement in local affairs as a source for change, they are increasingly concerned that she and her family are simply replicating traditional abuses of power.  2. (S/NF) On June 21, Mukhtaran's brother Hazoor Bakhsh convened a panchayat (traditional court) to review the case of a nine-year old girl Naseem who had been raped by three local individuals.  According to civil society activists, Mai had urged her brother to deal with the case through a panchayat rather than the formal legal system, arguing that the courts would not properly deal with the rapists.  At the panchayat, Bakhsh utilized his position and authority to order that the fifteen year old sister of one of the rapists, Faizan, be handed over in marriage to rape victim Naseem's father, Rasool Bakhsh, as compensation.  Rasool tortured Faizan who was rescued by her father and brother one day after her marriage.  3. (S/NF) Civil society groups claimed that during the same panchayat, Hazoor Bakhsh, issued an order acquiting five people from a neighboring village of the kidnap and rape of two sisters Zarina and Azhara.  Sources claim that despite promising the sister's justice at the panchayat, Hazoor Bakhsh took a Rs. 60,000 (approximately $1000) bribe for their acquittal and ruled against the sisters -- effectively finding them guilty of illicit sexual relations.  4. (S/NF) Mukhtaran's reaction to these two incidents that have received limited (and at times inaccurate) play in the local media has been muted.  She has repeatedly denied her brother's involvement in the panchayat claiming that the allegations were \"politically motivated.\"  She has cited her brother's omission from the police report filed on the panchayat as evidence of his innocence.  Civil society sources, however, assert that Hazoor Bakhsh and Mukhtaran bribed local police to keep his name out of the report.  5. (S/NF) Comment:  Post is reluctant to believe that Mukhtaran would perpetuate the panchayat system that abused her so badly in the past, but the number of credible civil society organizations that have confirmed her and her brother's involvement in these incidents is impossible to ignore.  Mukhtaran's and Hazoor Bakhsh's involvement in this case was reported in the July 8 edition of \"The Daily Times\" and other Engligh-language papers.  Reportedly the police have now registered a rape case against one of the individuals behind the precipitating attack.  We will continue to remain in contact with local civil society organizations in Mianwalli regarding the case.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD13344", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/13/2006 4:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 013378  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/12/2016 TAGS: KWMN, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: OPTIONS FOR DRL PROGRAMMING SUPPORT TO PROMOTE WOMEN IN PAKISTAN  REF: ISLAMABAD 13344  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  Consultations with Pakistan's Minister of Women's Affairs, as well as women legal scholars and activists from across Pakistan, point to two promising areas for USG assistance in promoting women's human rights in Pakistan.  The first is support for public information campaigns to help the government disseminate information on changes in laws affecting women.  The second avenue to support women would be through programming that improves their economic status.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Post has conducted a series of meetings with female legal scholars and human rights activists across Pakistan, as well as with the country's dynamic new Minister of Women's Affairs, Sumaira Malik.  The recurring messages from these meetings include the following:  -- Pakistan must improve legal protections for and cultural attitudes towards women;  -- Actions that meaningfully address women's human rights will be politically sensitive and risky;  -- A one-size-fits-all approach will not work - the issues vary too greatly from province to province and are deeply steeped in local cultures; and  -- Programs should be designed so as not to personalize the cause or solutions around any single individual or victim.  3.  (C)  All sources discussed the possible backlash that could result from support for programs that address women's issues if the assistance is \"Western,\" stressing that if the USG wishes to be helpful in promoting women's rights, assistance should be delivered through respected local organizations.  4.  (C)  If the Minister of Women's Affairs succeeds in securing amendments to current laws that affect women (reftel), information campaigns will be necessary to spread the word to those who enforce and those who are affected by the laws.  For example, as radio and television coverage does not reach all corners of Pakistan, the Minister was enthusiastic about community dramas that could be performed in town and villages throughout the country, presenting serious messages in an entertaining manner, or training Lady Health Workers, who routinely visit rural homes, to disseminate information on these laws.  5.  (C)  Post's contacts also agreed that many of the problems Pakistani women face arise from their economic disempowerment.  To address this, our contacts suggested that the U.S. sponsor programs that provide micro-credit, business and bookkeeping training, and support for development of women-owed medium-enterprises that add value to any number of the country's primary products, including dairy, agriculture or mining produce.  The Minister suggested possible partnership with international enterprises that are familiar with import/export standards and gradings.  6.  (C)  Post recommends that DRL solicit submissions from eligible NGOs that propose creative pro-women public information campaigns and/or economic empowerment programs. Due to the sensitivities underscored to us several times, post strongly urges that all submissions require partnership and on-the-ground implementation through respected Pakistani NGOs. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/14/2006 12:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 013519  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PK, IN, PREL SUBJECT: MUMBAI BLASTS: BROAD CONDEMNATION IN PAKISTAN   ISLAMABAD 00013519  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1.    (C) Summary.  Pakistani leaders and politicians have been unanimous in their condemnation of the July 11 Mumbai bombing, with the Foreign Ministry issuing a strong statement within hours of the attack that cited both President Musharraf and the Prime Minister Aziz. On July 13, President Musharraf offered Pakistani assistance in the investigation into the attacks. An ill-advised formulation by Foreign Minister Kasuri, associating the attack with the need for progress in the peace process, has unfortunately overshadowed these statements.  The MFA remains hopeful, perhaps unrealistically so, that the attack will not unduly rock the bilateral relationship. There are no outward indications of apprehension in the Pakistani military.  End Summary.  Government Condemns Blasts --------------------------  2.  (U) GOP officials were quick to condemn the Mumbai blasts.  Within three hours of the attack, the MFA had issued a statement saying: \"Pakistan strongly condemns the series of bomb blasts on commuter trains in Mumbai, India.  This despicable act of terrorism has resulted in the loss of a large number of precious lives.  The President and Prime Minister of Pakistan have also strongly condemned this terrorist attack and have expressed condolences over the loss of innocent lives.  Terrorism is a bane of our times and it must be condemned, rejected and countered effectively and comprehensively.\"  3.  (U) Unfortunately, this admirably clear statement was quickly buried when Foreign Minister Kasuri made remarks that linked the blasts to the lack of progress in resolving \"regional disputes.\"  Kasuri, who was visiting Washington, gave an interview with Reuters on the day of the attack as reports of rising casualties were coming in.  Told that the number had risen to 135, Kasuri termed it \"horrific. Absolutely horrendous....One hundred and thirty five is terrible and of course we strongly condemn this.\"  When Kasuri was subsequently asked whether to expect Pak-Indian talks to produce further confidence building measures, he responded that it was a question of political will and leadership, which was especially necessary in the wake of incidents like the Mumbai blasts. He then went on to speculate that resolution of disputes would \"improve the atmosphere against this climate of uncertainty and terrorism...because negative forces will be denied all motives, and will not be able to recruit people to their cause.  So I think the Mumbai incident -- however tragic it may be, and it is undoubtedly very tragic -- underlines the need for the two countries to work together to control this environment, but they can only do so if they resolve their disputes.\"  4.  (U) In the wake of strong negative reaction in India to these remarks, the GOP has issued further strong condemnations of the attack as well as clarifications intended to deny that Kasuri had made any linkage between the attacks and bilateral disputes.  On July 12, the Foreign Ministry issued a press release saying that Kasuri's remarks were misreported and that his denunciations of the bombings had been emphatic and unequivocal. Kasuri himself, as he prepared to leave Washington, blamed the bombings on \"those who oppose the peace process,\" and complained that it was \"unfair\" for India to \"attribute all acts of lawlessness and violence to Pakistan.\"  5.  (U) President Musharraf, in televised remarks on July 13, said \"whosoever has done this cannot be pardoned at all,\" and added \"I assure Prime Minister Manmohan Singh that the Pakistan government and I myself are with him in any investigation he wants to carry out.\"  ISLAMABAD 00013519  002.2 OF 003    MFA Hopeful Blasts Won't Derail Peace Initiatives --------------------------------------------- ----  6.  (U) MFA DG for South Asia, Jalil Abbas Jilani on July 14, praised Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's statement following the blast as \"remarkable\" and quoted Indian Home Minister Shivraj Patil as saying that terrorists were the enemies of peace and should not be allowed to delay the peace process. It was a \"very mature\" statement, Jilani said.  He remained hopeful that the Foreign Secretary-level talks between India and Pakistan (the conclusion of third round of the Composite Dialogue) would take place as scheduled on July 21-22 -- but the MFA had received mixed signals.  On the one hand, Pakistan's Foreign Secretary had held a good telephonic planning session on July 12, but on the other, Pakistan's mission in New Delhi had been rebuffed on July 12 when trying to gain the MEA's consent to formally issue the dates for the talks. There was also considerable speculation in the Indian media that the talks would be postponed.  Jilani explained that this was the context for the MFA spokesperson's remarks on July 12: \"If India feels that these talks should be postponed to a later date, we can go along with that ...We understand the big tragedy.  We will wait for India's convenience.\"  Indian Diplomats Angered by Kasuri Comments -------------------------------------------  7.  (C) At a diplomatic function July 12, the Indian Deputy High Commissioner was openly outraged by Kasuri's linkage of the bombings with bilateral disputes.  In the presence of numerous guests, he termed it \"stupid\" and \"not at all helpful.\"  At the same time, he appeared to appreciate the condolences offered by numerous eminent Pakistanis at the event.  In a separate bilateral meeting with Polcouns, the Indian High Commission Political Counselor acknowledged that official contacts were continuing in preparation for next week's Composite Dialogue talks.  He noted that virtually every significant Pakistani political figure -- both in and out of government -- had condemned the attacks.  The Press and the Political Parties -----------------------------------  8.  (U) The Mumbai attacks have received extensive and sympathetic coverage in the Pakistani media, though in some papers (particularly the Urdu papers) there has been a tendency to see the blasts as evidence that the two countries need to work harder to resolve their differences.  Both English and Urdu papers commend India for its restraint following the attacks.  9.  (U) Political leaders from almost every party have condemned the attacks both privately and publicly.  The first off the block was the MQM, which issued a statement on July 11 from Altaf Hussain calling the bombing a \"cowardly act of open terrorism.\"  (Note: the MQM is a party that represents the interests of Urdu-speaking immigrants from India.)  The Pakistan People's Party and the Awami National Party have also made strong statements.  JUI(F) leader, Maulana Fazlur Rahman condemned the attacks during a TV program, and sent a condolence letter to the Indian High Commission.  Jamiaat Islami (JI) leader Qazi Hussain Ahmad has not issued any public statement, to our knowledge, though a lesser JI official has told us that indeed JI condemns the bombing.  The Military ------------  10.  (C) We have not sounded out Pakistani military leaders, but DAO reports that outward appearances suggest the military, like the MFA, is not unduly alarmed about serious  ISLAMABAD 00013519  003.2 OF 003   fallout in the bilateral relationship.  There are no indications that anyone in the security establishment anticipates the kinds of tensions that followed the 2001 attack on the Indian Parliament.  We have observed no unusual activity at Chaklala airbase.  Vice Chief of Army staff Ehsan  is scheduled to visit the UK over the weekend.  The Deputy DGMO, BG Nasser, was planning to visit Afghanistan, and the Chief of Naval Staff, Adm. Tahir is in Bahrain.      CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/18/2006 2:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 013677  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: JIRGA CALLED TO NEGOTIATE PEACE IN WAZIRISTAN   ISLAMABAD 00013677  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (C) Summary. NWFP Governor Jan Mohammad Orakzai on July 16 announced the convening of a 45 member grand jirga to bring peace to Waziristan (and FATA at-large).  The jirga of FATA notables--comprised of MNAs, Senators and mostly JUI-F local politicians from 6 of the 7 agencies--will be tasked with negotiating with militants on behalf of GOP and will set conditions for peace.  (South Waziristan tribal reps have largely been left out for prior bad faith in negotiations). The jirga will begin work immediately, while the GOP concurrently makes good on some conditions--such as the release of imprisoned SW and NW militants--reportedly agreed upon during back-channel meetings. GOP expects the militants to extend their ceasefire as a show of good faith for the negotiations. End summary.  JIRGA CONVENED -------------- 2. (C) FATA Secretariat officials on July 12 outlined for reporters a general sketch of a grand jirga (gathering of tribal elders) to be held to stem the tide of militant attacks in North Waziristan. Officials have been reluctant to release details on the mandate and composition of the jirga to the public, but sources in the FATA Secretariat and the press indicated to Poloffs that the 45 member jirga will be comprised of representatives from each agency and Frontier Region. (South Waziristan representation will be limited because GOP officials say the interlocutors are untrustworthy.) Politicians tapped for the jirga are largely affiliated with Jamaat-e Ulema-e Islam Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F). (Note: The heavy weight given to JUI-F reflects the representation of the JUI-F within the pool of Members of the National Assembly (MNA), Senators, and local leaders from which the jirga will be culled. JUI-F has also been strongly opposed to the growing presence of local Taliban in FATA. End Note.) MNA Maulana Nek Zaman (North Waziristan), Abdur Rehman (President of the JUI-F in North Waziristan), Senator Mateen Shah (SWA), and Maulana Mohammad Alim are among the notables reportedly chosen for the jirga.  3. (C) Press and FATA Secretariat contacts indicate that Governor Orakzai and his military counterparts have tasked the chosen jirga to meet with representatives in Waziristan as well as the Frontier Regions. They are expected to negotiate with tribals and militants to:  --Set the overall conditions for peace; --Stop the attacks against FC and Military posts and personnel; --Gain assurances that militants won't disrupt development activities; --Stymie the militant propaganda campaign against GOP; and --Stop the display of weapons in major market areas. (Note: As we have reported separately, the GOP has been clear that harboring foreigners and cross-border infiltration are non-negotiable conditions. End note.)  CO-OPTING SOUTH WAZIRISTAN ------------------------- 4. (C) South Waziristan representatives are unlikely to be a part of the larger jirga because Orakzai reportedly does not trust the representatives who negotiated with GOP in 2004 and subsequently broke the agreement. They are, however, trying to build up trust in back-channel negotiatins with some South Waziristan militants from the Wazir tribe responsible for IED attacks against convoys in the Shakai Valley in December and March 2006. The militants said they had launched the attacks to protest the detention of militants in SW. After protracted negotiations, GOP officials released at least two SW militants (Ida Khan and Dawar Khan) as part of a settlement agreement designed to elicit cooperation from local taliban leader Maulvi Mohammad Omar.  ISLAMABAD 00013677  002.2 OF 002    COMMENT ------- 5. (C) Governor Orakzai's reliance on tribal customs and quiet back-channel negotiations has reportedly made some progress. Journalists indicate that the Governor's insistence to the military that the cease-fire be upheld from the GOP side despite continued suicide bomb attacks in late June is the reason militants continue to negotiate with GOP representatives. We have assurances from the highest levels of the government that no cross-border militancy will be tolerated while the jirga is underway.  We will be watching closely to see how this is observed. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD13519|06NEWDELHI5036", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/19/2006 14:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 013801  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2016 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PK, IN SUBJECT: MUMBAI BOMBINGS: PAKISTAN SEES POSTPONEMENT OF COMPOSITE DIALOGUE TALKS AS A NEGATIVE DEVELOPMENT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 13519      B. NEW DELHI 5036  Classified By: Derived from DSCG 05-01, d   1.  (C) Summary.  Pakistani leaders, including President Musharraf, regret India's cancellation of the Foreign Secretary level Composite Dialogue talks planned for July  SIPDIS 20-21.  They confirm that Indian counterparts informed them over the weekend that the talks would not be taking place. Although they had anticipated India's decision, they are nonetheless disappointed, with President Musharraf observing that stalling the talks plays into the hands of terrorists who oppose the peace process. End Summary.  2.  (U) President Musharraf, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz and Foreign Minister Kasuri have all expressed concern in recent days over India's cancellation of the Foreign Secretary level Composite Dialogue talks planned for July 20-21.  The talks were to have been the conclusion of the third round of the Dialogue, addressing a range of possible Confidence Building Measures that have been raised in lower-level negotiations over the past six months.  Following Musharraf's July 18 meeting with the National Security Council, the GOP issued a news bulletin reporting that he had cautioned that stalling the peace process would be \"unfortunate\" and would play into the hands of terrorists.  \"We must not allow such terrorist acts to undermine the historic opportunity for lasting peace between Pakistan and India.\"  Musharraf went on to regret the \"unsubstantiated allegations\" emanating from India and renewed his earlier offer to \"help with the investigation\" if India were to share concrete information.  3.  (U) According to press reports, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz has also urged that the peace talks should continue, despite the Mumbai blasts.  \"We should carry on,\" he said, adding that India had not responded to Pakistan's offer of cooperation in the investigation.  Foreign Minister Kasuri is also reported to have weighed in, characterizing the postponement of the talks as a \"negative development,\" and complaining that India was making unhelpful \"spontaneous allegations\" and turning Pakistan into a \"scapegoat.\"  Kasuri went on to question what interest the Pakistan Government could possibly have in supporting terrorism and promoting instability when Pakistan's future lay in its role as a \"hub\" between South and Central Asia.  Pakistan wanted stability in the region, and was working hard to that end.  4. (U) On July 19, Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan convened G-8 and EU Ambassadors to confirm that Pakistan had received notice from India that his meetings scheduled for July 20-21 were not possible because of the environment surrounding the Mumbai blasts.  New dates had not been floated, but he interpreted Manmohan Singh's comments in the wake of the blasts as an encouraging indicator that the peace talks were not stalled. Khan repeated Pakistan's offer to assist in the investigation on the basis of solid evidence.  Pakistan was a part of the cadre of nations fighting the war on terror, he observed, and would certainly act if given specific information.  Pakistan took the position that there should be no activity from its soil that was harmful to another nation.  Khan hoped that CBMs would remain in place, because the process was important for the two nations, for the region and for the world. Moreover it would be constructive to devote renewed efforts on long-stalled issues like the Siachen Glacier and Sir Creek.  The \"ultimate CBM is the ability to resolve problems,\" he observed.  Khan acknowledged, however, that he had no idea when the talks would reconvene or where.   5. (C) In a July 19 meeting with Polcouns, DG for South Asia  ISLAMABAD 00013801  002 OF 002   Jalil Jilani said that India's postponement of the talks was not a surprise.  Indeed, even before the attacks he had noticed a surge in unsubstantiated allegations of Pakistan's involvement in terrorism.  These allegations were inconsistent with the evidence, as acknowledged by third parties and even by some Indian officials, that levels of infiltration had dropped by as much as 80 percent.  At the \"highest level\" even Indians were aware of Pakistan's efforts.  The Indian Home Secretary, after a visit to Pakistan in June, had publicly acknowledged that the number of incidents had dropped significantly.  Jilani said that in Pakistan's view it would be impossible to reduce the number incidents to zero because there were highly motivated \"disgruntled elements\" that would continue trying to mount operations, whether from Indian Kashmir or elsewhere. President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz had assured Indian leaders that there was no official support from Pakistan and National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz had discussed the issue at length with his Indian counterpart last month in Dubai.  6.  (C) Echoing Musharraf and Riaz Khan, Jilani stressed that Pakistan was eager to assist India in the investigation.  But it needed clear information.  Unfortunately, India was historically very reluctant to share such information out of fear that it would reveal sources. But in Jilani's view there was also a political dimension; he suspected that India welcomed the excuse to officially postpone the talks because they were in a stalling phase anyway on virtually all significant issues.  Nonetheless Jilani regretted the postponement, saying that he thought the sides were close to agreement on a CBMs relating to nuclear accidents, prisoners and visas.  Jilani characterized Pakistan's reaction to Indian accusations and implications as \"very moderate, very mature.\"  There had been no counter accusations following the postponement of the talks.  Pakistan had simply said it was a \"negative development.\"  \"Pakistan's goal is to get back to the dialogue process,\" he concluded, \"that is the bottom line.\"  Comment -------  7.  (C) We understand that postponement of these talks was all but inevitable, given Indian public sentiment in the wake of the Mumbai bombing -- specifically the public perception that Pakistan must have been involved.  However, these talks and the modest CBMs emerging from them, are one of the few bright spots in the relationship and they have had a significant impact in shaping Pakistani perceptions of India.  Musharraf is correct in observing that the sides should not allow terrorists, who have long opposed peace efforts, to hold the process hostage.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/19/2006 18:22", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 013862  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN: RAIDS ON ILLEGAL AFGHANS NET TALIBAN  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1. (C) Summary. Police in Quetta arrested approximately 200 Afghan nationals during a series of raids July 16, 17, and 18 intended to round up illegal Afghans ahead of the closure of two refugee camps next month.  Police officials indicate that those arrested are accused of being in Pakistan without refugee or immigration status. One of the raids led to the capture of at least one \"senior\" level former Taliban commander from Helmand Province--Mullah Hamdullah Achekzai-- according to the IG Police. Balochistan police are currently investigating the other detainees for Taliban/ACM links. End summary.  AFGHANS ROUNDED UP IN QUETTA ---------------------------- 2. (U)  Balochistan police on July 16, 17, 18 conducted a series of raids in Quetta intended to round up Afghan nationals illegally residing in Pakistan. Staff members of Inspector General of Police (IGP) Chowdry Mohammad Yaqub confirmed that over the course of three days, police in Quetta have rounded up over 200 \"illegal\" Afghan nationals. Police and intelligence agencies told Emboffs they have been keeping track of the roughly 150,000 Afghans in Quetta and launched the raids to cull those they believe are \"suspicious\". Press reports citing unnamed sources suggest that the raids were conducted on the basis of suspicions that concentrations of Taliban were present.  The same sources say that further campaigns will be launched in other areas--including Chaman, Zhob, Lorelai, Dalbadin, and Pischin.  DIG Quetta Salman Syed is reported to have said that the arrested Afghans were \"Taliban fighters\".  Post has received no independent confirmation that Taliban cells were in fact the target of the raids.  3. (C) Those detained over the course of the raids will be charged under the \"Foreigners Act,\" according to the IGP and will eventually be deported to Afghanistan. Police officials are currently investigating those under arrest for links to the Taliban and other anti-coalition militant communities. The Special Superintendent of Police (SSP) in Quetta told Emboffs on July 17 that at least one of the detainees--Hamdullah Achekzai--is a known former Taliban commander from Helmand Province, Afghanistan. Hamdullah--who was found with a small cache of communications equipment--sustained bullet wounds during the raid.  COMMENT ------- 4. (C) The Mid-July raids in Quetta coincide with the Government of Pakistan's plans to permanently close two Bolochistan refugee camps where UNHCR services ceased last summer by August 31 (reftel). GOP officials are also seriously concerned by the concentration of Afghan nationals who have illegally taken up residence in Quetta, Northern Balochistan, the FATA and NWFP, and these raids indicate a push to deport Afghans without legal visa status. Post continues to follow up with police, refugee, and military contacts to ascertain further details on the Taliban suspects rounded up. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/21/2006 14:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 014096  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/13/2011 TAGS: ASEC, PTER, PHUM, PK, KCRM, KWMN, SMIG, ELAB, KFRD SUBJECT: EMBASSY ASSESSMENT OF SUNDAY TIMES JUD TRAFFICKING STORY  REF: EMBASSY ISLAMABAD VISA CASE NUMBER 2004112 699      0002  Classified By: Peter W. Bodde, DCM, Reasons 1.5 (d)   1. (SBU) Summary: On May 21, London,s Sunday Times published a story written by Marie Colvin that detailed a slavery ring run by a member of a USG designated terrorist organization, Jamaat-ud-Daawa (JuD).  The story follows a Pakistani Christian named 'Amir', whose real name is Pervaiz Yaqoob (please protect), and an American evangelist named  Brother David, as they purchase and secure the release of 20 Christian children allegedly kidnapped from their homes by 'Gul Khan', described as a leading member of JuD.  Yaqoob claims that he and his family have been in hiding since the publication of the story and has appealed for US visas for himself and his family.  Although Embassy finds it plausible that Yaqoob and 'Brother David' uncovered a trafficking ring, it is not clear that the victims were targeted because of their religion or that there is any involvement by JuD. Pakistan has an improving record on human trafficking, and Post has a strong relationship with the Government of Pakistan (GOP) on the issue.  Post has encouraged 'Brother David' and Yaqoob to share their evidence with the GOP.  End summary.  2. (SBU) On June 9, Poloffs met with Yaqoob to verify the details of the Sunday Times story, titled &Rescued ) the Pakistan Children Seized by Islamist Slave Traders.8  In a two-and-a-half-hour conversation, Yaqoob detailed much of what was reported in the story, but was unable to provide evidence to back up the claims of trafficking.  When asked for the names and cell phone numbers of the traffickers, names and addresses of the victims, and the videotape described by the Sunday Times as capturing the payment exchange between him and the traffickers, Yaqoob told Poloffs that all of the information was with  Brother David., (Note: 'Brother David' is described in the Sunday Times article as being associated with the \"Help Pakistani Children\" charity.  He subsequently mailed the videotape to the Department, which then shipped it Post for viewing. Neither  Brother David, nor Yaqoob has provided the other evidence required to verify portions of their story.  End note.)  3. (SBU) Yaqoob,s main concern during the meeting with Poloffs was securing a visa for himself and his family.  He said that since the story was published he and his family have been in hiding, afraid of reprisal from JuD.  Poloffs stressed to Yaqoob that while sympathetic to his predicament, he did not seem eligible for a US visa.  (Note:  Yaqoob and his wife were denied US tourist visas on May 11, 2004 (Ref A).  End note.)  4. (SBU) Poloffs instead strongly encouraged Yaqoob to share his story with the Pakistani authorities, who might be able to offer him some protection.  Yaqoob responded that he does not trust the Pakistani authorities to protect him and was reluctant to share evidence unless the USG could guarantee his security.  5. (SBU) When asked for evidence that the trafficking operation was run by JuD and that it was specifically targeting Christian children, Yaqoob said that one of the kidnappers had told him they were members of JuD.  Yaqoob added that  Brother David, and the story's author concluded that Christian children were the target after following some of the children home after their release and talking to their parents.  At Post's request, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) conducted an investigation into the Sunday Times article and did not find evidence of kidnapped Christian children or JuD,s involvement in trafficking.  Nor did investigators discover any information on the alleged lead trafficker, who identified himself to Yaqoob as \"Gul Khan.\"  The GOP has assured the Embassy that it would accept and investigate any new evidence passed to them.  6. (SBU) On June 12, Poloff spoke with Marie Colvin, author of the Sunday Times article.  Colvin said all her information on the trafficking ring and Gul Khan came from Yaqoob and 'Brother David.'  She was not present for any of the meetings with Gul Khan and did not witness the purchasing of children.  She asserted a trafficking connection with JuD because she had earlier traveled near the JuD headquarters in Muridke, Punjab and thought she recognized the same location in the video Yaqoob filmed on the night he allegedly purchased 17 children from Gul Khan. (Note: Both Poloffs and a senior FSN Investigator (and former Pakistani law enforcement captain) viewed the videotape filmed by Yaqoob.  Post believes that  ISLAMABAD 00014096  002 OF 002   the videotape does not verify the Sunday Times allegations and would be of very little value to GOP authorities in any investigation. 'Brother David' has asked Post not to share the video with GOP without his approval.  End note.)  7. (SBU) Post and Consulate Lahore have contacted numerous NGOs for additional information.  No group had heard of the \"Help Pakistani Children\" charity, JuD involvement in human trafficking or a human trafficker named Gul Khan prior to the article's publication and had no information on the event described in the article. (Note: Colvin told Poloff that the \"Help Pakistani Children\" charity was created for the article to conceal the church 'Brother David' and Yaqoob belonged to.  End note.)  8. (SBU) Through subsequent e-mail exchanges between  Brother David, and the Department, 'Brother David' has informed the Department and Post that Yaqoob and his family have secured a visa for an unnamed Asian country.  Poloff has subsequently tried to contact Yaqoob, most recently on July 14, but has been unable to reach him to confirm his departure from Pakistan.  Comment --------  9. (C) While the GOP continues to work hard to combat human trafficking, there are credible reports of children, of all religions, being kidnapped in rural areas and trafficked into slavery, sexual exploitation and forms of bonded labor. There are also credible reports of Christian children being kidnapped by religious groups in Pakistan for forced conversion into Islam.   However, apart from the Sunday Times article, there are no reports of Islamists specifically targeting Christian children for trafficking purposes.  On its website, JuD has denied any involvement in trafficking children and repudiated the Sunday Times article.  It is not implausible that Yaqoob and  Brother David, stumbled upon a human trafficking ring in Pakistan.  However, with the limited evidence presented to Post, the connection between JuD and trafficking is tenuous.  10. (SBU) Post has a strong partnership with the GOP on human trafficking issues.  The GOP has an improving record on human trafficking issues and has been receptive in investigating cases brought to its attention by Post and other members of the international/NGO community.  However, until 'Brother David' and Yaqoob agree to provide all evidence in their possession to the GOP, the GOP cannot thoroughly investigate the alleged trafficking ring. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE119436", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/24/2006 10:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 014190  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT PLEASE PASS TO ALL SOUTH ASIA COLLECTIVE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2011 TAGS: KNNP, PARM, PREL, IR, EU, AORC, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON P5+1 INCENTIVE PACKAGE FOR IRAN  REF: STATE 119436  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.5 (b)  1. (C) On July 21, Poloff delivered ref A demarche points to the MFA Acting-Director for Americas, Abdul Hameed.  Hameed accepted demarche points and said he would forward them to the appropriate parties.  On July 22, Poloff followed up with MFA Director for Disarmament, Wasim Ashraf.    Ashraf said that the GOP had welcomed talks between the EU-3 and Iran as well as the US and Iran.  Ashraf added that the GOP wants a peaceful resolution to this matter and recognizes that Iran has both rights and obligations under the NPT.  Ashraf said he had not heard anything formally or informally from Iranian officials on whether they would accept or reject the P5 1 incentive package. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD13862", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/24/2006 13:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 014208  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER SUBJECT: PAKISTANIS EXPEL 58 AFGHANS  REF: ISLAMABAD 13862  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde, Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (C) Summary. Pakistani authorities turned over 58 Afghan nationals to Afghanistan Sunday from among the more than 200 Afghans rounded up in and around Quetta early last week. It is not known whether any of the 58 have ties to the Taliban, but Embassy contacts say the 58 were among those arrested in madrassahs during the raids. End summary.  2. (C) Two journalist contacts say that the 58 Afghans that Pakistan handed over to Afghan authorities on Sunday at the Chaman-Spin Boldak border crossing were among the 239 Afghans picked up in raids on July 16, 17, and 18 in and around Quetta. (Note. Press reports of the numbers detained in the raids range from 215 to 250 Afghans. End note.)  Journalist contacts suspect that the 58 who were released were undocumented Afghans, while the ones still in Pakistani custody are those with valid documents but who were not carrying them at the time of arrest. The 58 were attending various madrassahs in and around Quetta. An agitated JUI-F contact complained that the madrassah raids were conducted without warning.  3. (C) The only one of the 239 with known ties to the Taliban, Hamdullah Achakzai, a known former Taliban commander from Helmand Province in Afghanistan, was still being held by the Pakistanis. As reported reftel, Pakistani police claimed in the immediate aftermath of the arrests that they rounded up those considered \"suspicious\" and that the police would see whether those arrested had ties to the Taliban. Originally, Pakistani authorities said they would check the Afghans for connections to the Taliban or other anti-Coalition militant groups. However, according to press reports, a Pakistani police inspector said Sunday that the Afghan authorities would be the ones to investigate whether any of the 58 turned over were linked to the Taliban.  4. (C) Comment. Regardless of the exact reason these Afghans were picked up and their ultimate connection to the Taliban, the speed with which the GOP handed the 58 over to the Afghan authorities suggests the GOP is eager to demonstrate responsiveness to Afghan and Coalition concerns regarding the Taliban in the Quetta area. Post will be monitoring how the GOP handles Hamdullah Achakzai and any of the other 181 remaining in Pakistani custody who may turn out to have definite links to the Taliban. Police contacts in Quetta have provided Post a list of the 181 Afghans still in Pakistani custody, and Post has e-mailed this list to Embassy Kabul. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD13677", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/24/2006 14:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 014209  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2011 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: JULY 24 UPDATE ON GRAND JIRGA  REF: ISLAMABAD 13677  Classified By: Peter W. Bodde, DCM, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Consulate Peshawar and Post have confirmed July 23 press stories that militants in Waziristan have extended a one-month ceasefire with Government of Pakistan (GOP) army troops until August 25.  On July 21, militants also released four Frontier Corps scouts that were being held captive.  2. (C) As a reciprocating gesture of goodwill, the GOP has released 32 militants from jail, removed six Frontier Corps checkpoints in North Waziristan, and restored the rights and privileges of the local tribesmen.  3. (C) According to an Embassy contact who is a reporter based in the tribal areas, the Grand Jirga has asked the local Taliban militants in North Waziristan to expel foreigners.  Any foreigner wishing to stay in Pakistan would have to register with the government and not engage in any cross-border activity.  The local Taliban have formed an eight-member council to negotiate with the Grand Jirga on issues pertaining to harboring foreigners, cross border infiltration and attacks on the GOP.  4. (C) Comment.  The Jirga seems to be getting off to a good start, with both the GOP and militants trying to show good faith.  The key test will be the GOP's ability to win compliance on their demands regarding foreign terrorists and cross border infiltration. President Musharraf has been clear on these points.  In his July 20 televised address to the nation, President Musharraf extended his \"full support\" to the Grand Jirga but evinced no flexibility on these demands:  \"Let me give a bottom-line... no foreigner (terrorist) would be allowed to remain on the soil of Pakistan. Either he should leave this place, or surrender and live peacefully there, otherwise he would be killed.  Secondly, no person would go to Afghanistan from Pakistan to take part in war and conflict there.  Thirdly, this Talibanization, which I called as a backward culture should not be imposed on others.\"  End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/27/2006 13:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 014349  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER SUBJECT: A PRIMER ON BALOCHISTAN  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (C) Summary: This cable--the first in a series of cables on the province--is intended to serve as a primer on Balochistan, Pakistan's largest, least developed, and most sparsely populated province. Other cables in this series will cover the tribal and ethnic political dynamics of the province, the insurgency, and Islamabad's plans for overcoming the insurgency. This message covers basic geographical and statistical information, as well as an ethnic breakdown of the province. The Government of Pakistan in recent years has invested heavily in the province to tap its mineral wealth and to turn it into a regional transportation hub. However, since 1948, Balochistan has been plagued by an on-again, off-again insurgency led by ethnically Baloch tribal leaders. The insurgency flared up again in early 2005 with tribal militants blowing up gas pipelines and electricity pylons; the GOP began a concerted crackdown last December after insurgents fired rockets at an army base near Kohlu that President Musharraf was visiting. Baloch discontent today centers on what they say is the unfair distribution of the natural resources and revenue generated in the province. Baloch argue that the province should receive a disproportionate share of the revenues generated by its mineral wealth because it has greater development needs than the other provinces. For example, the Baloch point out that pipelines from natural gas fields in the province were run to cities in Punjab decades before they reached the provincial capital, Quetta. Most of the recent fighting has been confined to the eastern portion of the province, but some high profile violence has occurred along the Makran Coast, including the killings of Chinese engineers involved with the construction of a deep sea port at Gwadar. End Summary.  Geography   3. (U) Balochistan is a parched and inhospitable land. While rich in minerals, geologists have compared Balochistan's terrain to Mars. Pakistan's nuclear testing site is in Balochistan. To the east and northeast, Balochistan borders all three of Pakistan's other provinces as well as the southernmost of the seven Federally Administered Tribal Agencies, South Waziristan. To the north, Balochistan shares borders with the Afghan provinces of Nimruz, Helmand, Qandahar, Zabol and Paktika. To the west it borders the Iranian province of Sistan-va-Baluchestan. On the south, Balochistan has more than 770 kilometers of coastline along the Arabian Sea.  4. (U) Area: At 347,190 square kilometers Balochistan is slightly smaller than Montana, and makes up nearly 44 percent of Pakistan's total area.  Socio-Economic Indicators   5. (U) Balochistan's population of 7.1 million (according to May 2003 government estimate) accounts for roughly 5.1 percent of Pakistan's total population. The province's population density of 19 people per square kilometer compares to a national average of 166 and an average of 358 in Punjab.  6. (U) The average literacy rate of the province is 31 percent, compared to a national average of 49 percent. Girls make up less than 37 percent of the primary through high school enrollment, and according to provincial government statistics, out of the number of students attending primary school, less than 16 percent of boys and 13 percent of girls go on to middle school. Baloch nationalists believe that the low education levels stem from federal government neglect.  7. (U) Balochistan's per capita income is roughly USD 160, less than one-fifth of the national average of approximately USD 850.  ISLAMABAD 00014349  002 OF 004    8. (U) Natural resources include gas, coal, gold, copper, iron, marble, gypsum, and limestone. The province produces more than 40 percent of Pakistan's primary energy (natural gas, coal, and electricity), but while natural gas generates USD 1.4 billion in annual revenues, the province receives back just USD 116 million a year in royalties, or 8 percent, one of the major causes of friction between the nationalists and the federal government. Industries include cotton, woolen, and leather goods, iron and steel production, silk and rayon manufacturing, cement factories, and jute production.  Infrastructure and Reserves   9. (U) The Sui gas field, through 2005, had produced approximately 45 percent of Pakistan's domestic natural gas, however remaining reserves at the Sui field  are now a third of the original total, equaling about 12.5 percent of Pakistan's total natural gas reserves.  10. (U) The Chinese operated copper and gold mine in Saindak, which has more than 400 million metric tons of reserves, generated nearly USD 170 million of exportable revenues in 2003. In 2004 the Saindak operation employed nearly 1,200 Pakistani and just over 300 Chinese workers. The federal government receives a 2 percent annual royalty from the operation.  11. (U) The recently discovered Rekodiq copper-gold deposit in northwestern Balochistan near Saindak, with its estimated 940 million metric tons of reserves, is potentially one of the largest in the world, and is set to be mined by a Canadian-Chilean joint venture. The Balochistan government has a 25 percent stake in the project.  12. (U) Reserves at the Dilband iron-ore deposit are estimated at 200 million metric tons. The province has just over 200 million metric tons of coal reserves, a fraction of Punjab's 175 billion tons of reserves.  13. (U) Infrastructure: The USD 1.1 billion Gwadar deepwater cargo and naval port when completed will provide Pakistan with its third major port facility and act as a major outlet for Pakistani trade with Afghanistan and the central Asian republics. Gwadar will have a dozen multipurpose berths, including two oil terminals, and the latest generation of containerized cargo handling facilities. The port opening has been delayed--it was scheduled to open in June after a second-stage dredging--and top GOP officials have been unable to say when the port will open. China has invested heavily in the project, providing USD 198 million of the USD 248 million cost of the project's first phase. Analysts have suggested that this is a strategic investment to enable China to take advantage of the port's proximity to the Persian Gulf and China's westernmost province, Xinjiang. The GOP and Beijing have already discussed building an oil refinery and possibly a pipeline between Balochistan and Xinjiang. Balochistan is also a possible transit route for pipelines from Turkmenistan to the Arabian Sea or India, and from Iran to India.  Government   14. (U) Like other provinces, Balochistan has a Provincial Assembly and Chief Minister, with a Governor appointed by the federal President. Federal level representation consists of 17 Members of the National Assembly (out of 342 seats) and 22 members of the federal Senate (out of 100 seats).  15. (U) Currently the province is governed by a coalition of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) and the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA). The MMA contingent is composed almost exclusively of Pashtun members of the Jamiat-e-Ulema-e-Islam/Fazlur Rehman Faction (JUI/F). The  ISLAMABAD 00014349  003 OF 004   Baloch are divided between the nationalist parties and the PML. The nationalists hold just under a quarter of the seats in the assembly.  16. (U) The province is divided into 26 administrative districts. Major cities and towns include the provincial capital Quetta, Kalat, Khuzdar, Kohlu, Loralai, and Zhob.  Ethnic Snapshot   17. (C) The Baloch, with 45 percent of the population, are the dominant ethnic group in most of the province. However, Pashtuns, with 38 percent, are the most populous in the northeastern quarter. As of December 2005, there were also 683,000 Afghan refugees in the province, according to UNHCR. Many Baloch nationalists claim that the Baloch make up as much as 60 percent of the province's population, asserting such a high percentage because these nationalists fear that the Baloch are becoming a minority in their own province. This fear is fueled, in part, by a rising tide of Punjabi and Sindhi settlers who have entered the province to find work in projects such as Gwadar. The Baloch and Pashtuns live in their own \"defined areas,\" according to one Embassy contact. The majority of Baloch are Hanafi Sunni Muslims. The Baloch tribal system has been described as \"feudal militarism,\" with power concentrated in the hands of local tribal leaders or powerful Sardars. (Note: This contrasts sharply with the far more egalitarian Pashtun tribal society. End note).  18. (C) Currently, the most powerful sardars--each with a substanital militia--are those of the Bugti, Marri, and Mengal tribes, all of whom have been at odds with Islamabad in recent years. Each of these tribes is based in the eastern third of the province. (Note: The Sui gas fields are ound in the tribal territory of the Bugtis. End Note). The Bugtis are led by Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti; the Marris by Nawab Khair Bux Marri; and the Mengals by Sardar Atuallah Khan Mengal. The youngest of the three--Mengal--is about 75. Each of the three tribes is associated with a different political party: Bugti founded the Jamhoori Watan Party; Mengal founded the Balochistan National Party; and Marri is tied to the Baloch Haq Tawar Party as well as the Baluchistan Liberation Army. While these three tribes have been behind the insurgency in recent years, there are at least two dozen other sardars--some estimates put the number at more than 70--who are on friendly terms with the government. Most of these other sardars are found in the western and southern portions of the province. Major subtribes of the Bugti are the Masoori and the Kalpars.  19. (C) The Pashtun part of the province includes the northeastern districts of Quetta, Pishin, Qila Abdullah, Ziarat, Qila Saifullah, Zhob, Musa Khel, and the northern portions of Loralai and Sibi. The Pashtun area borders the Afghan provinces of Zabol, Paktika, and Qandahar. Pashtuns are predominately Sunni Muslims. Pashtun society, like Baloch, is tribal but extremely egalitarian: tribal leaders are considered first among equals.  20. (C) The major Pashtun tribes in Balochistan are the Kakar, Tarin, Kansi, Shirani, Pani, Dawi, Ghilzai, and Babi. The Kakar are thought to be the most numerous tribe, and are found in and around Quetta and throughout the Pashtun majority districts. The Tarin, and their subtribe the Achakzai, are historically one of the largest tribes in the province. The Kansi were the historical fief-holders of Quetta for the Durrani Kings in Afghanistan and are the most populous tribe in the city. The Ghilzais in Balochistan are nomads, many of whom also have homes in Afghanistan, though many of the Sulemankhel subtribe have settled in and around Zhob. Key Pashtun leaders in the province include Mehmood Khan Achakzai, a Member of National Assembly and leader of the Pushtoonkhwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP), a Pashtun nationalist party, that shares many of the grievances of the Baloch nationalists; Abdul Rahim Khan Mandokhel, a federal  ISLAMABAD 00014349  004 OF 004   Senator from PKMAP; Muhammad Sarwar Khan Kaker, a federal Senator from the PML; and Rehmatullah Kaker, a federal Senator from the MMA.  21. (C) Comment. Baloch discontent and the province's mineral wealth are inextricably entwined. The Baloch perceive that the province's natural resources have been exploited for the benefit of the people and industries of Punjab. They also complain that the distribution of federal resources, which is based on population, puts Balochistan--a thinly populated province--at a disadvantage. Because of the underdevelopment of the province, especially in comparison to Punjab, Baloch argue that the province should receive a greater share of funds to allow the province to catch up with the rest of the country. Baloch disgruntlement also stems from what they see as a lack of adequate representation in the federal bureaucracy, as well as the military, thus they are demanding the enforcement of quotas already in federal law. These calls have strengthened as the Baloch have grown fearful that they will become second-class citizens in their own province because of the influx of skilled Punjabis and Sindhis seeking employment in the province's infrastructure projects such as Gwadar and the copper-gold mines in Saindak and Rekodiq. A political settlement that addresses these grievances would require substantial revisions to Pakistani law and distribution of royalties, which would depend on high level backing in Islamabad. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/2/2006 2:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 014910  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/01/2016 TAGS: KAWC, PHUM, PINR, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON UPCOMING GOP VISIT TO GUANTANAMO  REF: A. A. PORGES-BRADLEY EMAIL (07/31/2006)       B. B. ISLAMABAD 14210      C. C. STATE 11960      D. D. STATE 109356  1.  (U)  This is an action request; see paragraph 3.  2.  (C)  On July 31, Poloff met with MOI LtCol Imran Yaqoob, who said that only two GOP officials plan to travel to Guantanamo to visit detainees of Pakistani nationality -- himself and MOI Operations Officer, Major Khalid Mahmood Khan.  Yaqoob also stated that the MOI \"has concurred\" with the USG-proposed transfer framework for detainees and that the MFA should respond to Post's demarche (ref B) in the near future.  Post has contacted the MFA, which claims the MOI's written concurrence has not yet been received.  3.  (C)  Action request:  To ensure that Post has a good understanding of Washington's requirements concerning this trip and that the correct information is passed to the GOP, Post requests front-channel instructions regarding arrangements for this visit.  It would be helpful if the cable included the following information:  -- GOP officials who have been vetted and approved for travel to Guantanamo; -- Final confirmation of the dates and mode of travel to Guantanamo.  (Note: In a July 31 email (ref A), Post was notified that the tentative dates are August 8-10, but the dates frequently slip.) -- Confirmation that Washington agencies have all the information they need regarding the GOP delegation (i.e., statement of intent for visit, names of detainees to be interviewed, etc.); -- Clarification whether this Guantanamo visit is contingent on receipt of written assurances on humane treatment and continued access (ref B and C).  4.  (C)  Comment:  In order to facilitate this and future visits, Post requests early consultations and coordination with responsible DOS and DOD offices.  The experience of planning this trip has shown that the MOI and the MFA have internal agendas regarding the detainee issue, and close coordination with Washington can help overcome bureaucratic obstacles. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14910|06STATE127312", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/4/2006 11:50", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 015302  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (CHG CLASS)  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/03/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, PHUM, PINR, KAWC SUBJECT: CONFIRMATION OF GOP VISIT TO GTMO  REF: A. STATE 127312      B. ISLAMABAD 14910  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  On August 4, poloff delivered Ref A points in separate meetings with National Crisis Management Center (NCMC) Operations Director LTC Imran Yaqoob and MFA (Americas) Hameed Abdul.  2.  (S)  LTC Imran said that poloff's points track with the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) understanding of the arrangements for the August 8-10 visit to the Guantanamo Detention Facility, with the following exception:  the Pakistani delegation believed that it would see twelve (12) Pakistani nationals, not just the six (6) identified in Ref A.   LTC Imran provided poloff a list of the twelve Pakistani nationals that the GOP believes to be incarcerated at Guantanamo.  In addition to the six (6) individuals identified in Ref A, the GOP list includes:  -- Abdul Raheem, Suspect No. 45-US9AF-00561-DP, apprehended July 2002 in Pakistan (previously interviewed by GOP in August 2002)  -- Badar Uz Zaman, Suspect No. 48-US9AF-00559-DP, apprehended Nov 2001 in Afghanistan (previously interviewed by GOP in August 2002)  -- Aziz Ullah, Suspect No. US9PK-00047-DP, apprehended Nov 2001 in Afghanistan (previously interviewed by GOP in August 2002)  -- Mohammad Halim Sadiqi, Suspect No. US9AF-001007DP, apprehended Sept 2001 (included on DOD list presented to Director General-NCMC during April 2004 visit to WashDC -- \"DG NCMC List\")  -- Mohammad Akbar, Suspect No. US9PK-01200-DP, apprehended at Jalalabad Airport (DG NCMC List)  -- Sharifa, Suspect No. US9PK-01200-DP, apprehended July 2003 in Orgun (DG NCMC List)  3.  (S)  Poloff re-confirmed with LTC Imran that he and MAJ Khaild Mahmood Khan will be the only members of the Pakistani delegation traveling to Guantanamo.  4.  (S)  Comment:  LTC Imran has asked that the Pakistani Embassy in WashDC arrange for a meeting with DOD representatives on August 7 to review the arrangements for this visit.  He will certainly renew his request for access to the six detainees listed above.  Poloff agreed to forward the additional names to WashDC agencies soonest, so that USG interlocutors will be prepared to address this request for access.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06PESHAWAR413", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/7/2006 11:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 015543  SIPDIS  ///////CORRECTED COPY - PARA 2/////////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, PGOV SUBJECT: SOUTH WAZIRISTAN PARLIAMENTARIANS POSITIVE ON LOYA JIRGA  REF: PESHAWAR 413  ISLAMABAD 00015543  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)   1.  (C) Two senior and well-connected participants in the North Waziristan jirga expect the assembly to succeed and to issue binding decisions within 10-15 days.  While not divulging the details of each side's negotiating positions, they report that if the jirga is successful, it will result in the expulsion of foreigners from North Waziristan and end cross-border infiltration into Afghanistan.  End summary.  2. (C) On August 4, during a one-week break in the North Waziristan jirga, Polcouns met in Islamabad with two participants: South Waziristan Senator Saleh Shah Qureshi and South Waziristan MNA Maulana Mirajuddin.  Both were optimistic that the jirga would achieve its key objectives within 10-15 days.  Structure and Participation ---------------------------  3.  (C) Saleh and Mirajuddin confirmed that the jirga consists of 45 tribal representatives, including at least three from each of the seven tribal agencies.  The majority of members are from North and South Waziristan.  Participants include three MNAs and one Senator; the rest are a mix of respected tribal figures.  Saleh explained that NWFP Governor Orakzai had consulted with tribal representatives for two months before finalizing participation.  The resulting group is truly authoritative; it represents all parties, controlling both locals and foreigners.  Saleh maintained that with the inauguration of the jirga on July 20, cross-border infiltration had ceased -- a demonstration, he asserted, of the jirga's authority.  Saleh added that tribal participants were representative and had the stature to also speak for tribes on the Afghan side of the border; indeed, the idea had been discussed in the jirga that if it were successful, it could be extended to include the Americans and address the situation in Afghanistan.  4.  (C) The two explained that while the jirga was in session, the 45 members met during the day with militants at a location in Miranshah, North Waziristan. In the evening, they retreated to a GOP guest house in Miranshah where they held meetings with the Political Agent and other GOP representatives.  The group would meet with Governor Orakzai during the week of August 6, then return to Miranshah.  They expected that jirga would wrap up and start implementing decisions in 10-15 days (i.e., by August 13-18).  The decisions would be binding on both sides.  Process and Objectives ----------------------  5.  (C) By way of background, Mirajuddin observed that current problems in the FATA were largely the consequence of developments in Afghanistan in recent years.  On the one hand, foreigners had arrived and, in violation of tribal tradition, they had resorted to violence.  On the other hand, the Pakistan Army had also violated tribal tradition by using violence, to which the tribes were obliged to respond in kind.  Both Saleh and Mirajuddin insisted that the anti-GOP militancy was a broad-based tribal response to the army's incursions and resort to violence; attributing it to \"Taliban\" was merely propaganda.  They and other tribal leaders had long urged the government to address the conflict via a jirga, and they were hopeful that the current jirga process would resolve matters to the satisfaction of all parties.  If the jirga failed, there could be little hope of resolving the conflict because no other jirga could match the prestige of the current one.  6.  (C) Saleh and Mirajuddin explained that the current jirga  ISLAMABAD 00015543  002.2 OF 002   is an arbitration mechanism to resolve the dispute between the militants and the GOP.  According to tradition, such a process could only begin once three conditions are met.  The sides must lay down their weapons, release prisoners, and return any assets into the custody of the jirga. In the current jirga, this third condition meant the army must withdraw from its posts in North Waziristan.  This process has begun: a cease-fire is in place, prisoners have been exchanged and the army has vacated some positions.  The jirga is now dealing with other substantive demands by the government.  Saleh and Mirajuddin were reluctant to divulge these demands, saying that the jirga code required confidentiality.  Saleh did volunteer that if the jirga were  SIPDIS successful, foreigners would be expelled and infiltration into Afghanistan would stop.  7.  (C) When asked what leverage the Pakistan Government would have to ensure compliance once the jirga's preconditions were met, they responded that the government would have the ability to sanction tribes for non-compliance under the Frontier Crimes Regulations. (Note:  The FCR is a criminal code dating back to the British Raj whereby the tribes largely govern themselves, but the federal government has recourse to collective punishment when necessary.  End Note.)  Also, if (as they hoped) the Pakistan Army were to withdraw, the Frontier Corps would remain as a law-enforcement presence that was acceptable to the tribes. Moreover, the prestige of the jirga was such that violating its binding provisions would bring dishonor.  8.  (C) According to Saleh and Mirajuddin, the objective of the jirga is to achieve a reconciliation between the government and the militants such that no-one will be threatened, either in North Waziristan, in Afghanistan or in the international community.  The jirga is focusing exclusively on resolving the militancy in North Waziristan, they said; if the need arose to resolve disputes in other tribal areas, the jirga could be reconvened or a new one could be formed. The jirga is not discussing development projects or socio-economic incentives that might help facilitate a settlement.  Comment -------  9.  (C) President Musharraf has been clear that while he strongly supports the jirga, his redlines are that the foreigners must be expelled and cross-border attacks must stop. This message has clearly sunk in with the jirga members. The fact that the jirga focuses only on one Agency certainly leaves open the possibility that these phenomena might shift to other agencies. Nonetheless, if the jirga is successful in North Waziristan (the hardest case) it will be an important signal to the tribes in other Agencies -- especially coming as it did on the heels of Pakistan military operations (reftel).  Orakzai may have constituted the jirga -- with members from every agency -- with this contingency in mind, namely that it might be called on to address conflicts in other agencies as well.  10.  (C) The jirga is a tried-and-true mechanism for solving immediate, discrete problems.  It is not/not focused on the long-term political, security and economic challenges that must be addressed if the Tribal Areas as a whole are to evolve into a region less hospitable to militants.  We will continue to work with our Pakistani counterparts as they develop a comprehensive strategy for the area. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/7/2006 13:17", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015567  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: POST CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR TRAVEL TO KARACHI AND QUETTA   1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Poloff C. Gordon Bonin to travel to Karachi and onward to Quetta for a series of meetings with Balochistan political figures. This will be a continuation of a visit to Balochistan with Ambassador Crocker. Itinerary is as follows:  2 August 11 -- arrive in Karachi with Ambassador Crocker on C-12. August 12 -- depart Karachi on PIA PK 352 at 1430; arrive in Quetta at 1550. August 13 -- depart Quetta on PIA PK 352 at 1650; arrive in Islamabad at 1815.  3. Please provide transportation from/to Karachi airport and please make lodging arrangements for night of August 11 in Karachi.  4. Lodging on night of August 12 in Quetta to be provided at DynCorp facility.  5. Ground transportation to/from airport/meetings in Quetta to be provided by NAS.  6. Your assistance is appreciated and I look forward to visiting Karachi and Quetta. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/8/2006 4:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015637  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: LAHORE POST CLEARANCE REQUEST   1.  Embassy requests post clearance for DCM Peter Bodde, Tanya Bodde, and Theresa Grencik. The party will be visiting post for meetings and a reception.  2.  DCM Peter Bodde and Tanya Bodde's itinerary is as follows:  August 11  Dep Islamabad on PK 387 at 1500; arrive at 1550. August 12  Dep Lahore on PK 388 at 2000; arrive at 2050.  3. Ms. Grencik's itineray is as follows:  August 11  Dep Islamabad on PK 385 at 0800; arrive at 0850. August 12  Dep Lahore on PK 356 at 0800; arrive at 0850.  4.  Please provide transportation from/to the airport.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/8/2006 7:57", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015640  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: KARACHI POST CLEARANCE REQUEST  1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Ambassador Crocker, Gordon Bonin, and ARSO Erin Pallack. The party will be visiting Karachi, Quetta, and Gwadar for meetings.   2. Proposed itinerary by DAO C-12 aircraft  Depart Islamabad:  10 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Arrive Quetta:     10 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Depart Quetta:     10 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Arrive Mehran:     10 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Depart Mehran:     11 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Arrive Gwadar:     11 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Depart Gwadar:     11 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Arrive Mehran:     11 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Depart Mehran:     11 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft Arrive Islamabad:  11 Aug  @ by DAO C-12 aircraft  3. Awaiting final Itinerary times. Times subject to change due to weather and maintenance.   4.  Please provide transportation from/to the airport.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE128442", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/8/2006 10:26", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015649  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, MOPS, UN, IS, LE SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  LEBANON SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION  REF: STATE 128442  On August 7, POL made repeated efforts to contact officials at the MFA (UN Directorate) to convey reftel points and the draft text of the UNSC resolution on Lebanon.  As MFA Spokesperson and Director General (UN) Tasneem Aslam was unavailable for a meeting, POL delivered the reftel points and draft UNSCR text to her office as a non-paper.  Post will follow up with Aslam and convey to the Department any Government of Pakistan response to the U.S. call for broad support for the draft resolution. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE130145", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/9/2006 12:45", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015766  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: IS, LE, MOPS, PHUM, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON DERAILING UN HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL SPECIAL SESSION ON LEBANON  REF: STATE 130145  1.  Polcouns delivered reftel demarche on August 9 to Tariq Osman Hyder, Additional Secretary for UN Affairs at the MFA.  2.  Hyder responded that the decision to appeal to the Human Rights Council (HRC) was made at the August 3 meeting in Malaysia of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).  He noted that to address perceived Israeli violations of humanitarian law, the Putrajaya Declaration of August 3 calls for \"the immediate convening of a special session of the United Nations Human Rights Council as well as a meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the 4th Geneva Convention.\" The request to the HRC had been submitted by Tunisia, on behalf of both the OIC and the Arab League, but Pakistan had also played a role in its position as coordinator of the OIC human rights subgroup.  3.  Hyder defended the appeal to the HRC on a number of grounds:  -- He argued that it did not in any way preclude action by the Security Council.  \"We deal with human rights, they deal with peace and security,\" he observed, adding that there should not be any contradiction between the two. -- He maintained that the intrinsic nature of Israel's actions, namely killing of civilians and targeting of civilian infrastructure, put them under the purview of the HRC. -- The appeal was, he said, in keeping with the \"declared position of the United States, which is for the quickest possible cessation of hostilities.\"  Hostilities had now continued for more than three weeks and it was appropriate for the HRC to become engaged.  The objective of the resolution was to encourage an end to the fighting and attendant human suffering. -- The U.S. had engaged in a \"long process\" to establish the HRC, he said, in order to ensure that it would play a \"more useful, practical role.\"  With over 500 people killed on both sides it was time for the HRC to play this role. -- He added that political sentiment in the Moslem world was at an extremely high pitch over the death and destruction in Lebanon.  It was preferable, and in the interest of western countries, that this sentiment be channeled via appropriate international mechanisms, rather than allow it to move in a \"volatile, destabilizing and anti-western direction.\"  4.  Polcouns reiterated that the United States views the engagement of the HRC at this sensitive juncture as highly unhelpful, and urged that Pakistan reconsider its position and withdraw its support from the effort.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/11/2006 15:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 015977  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/11/2016 TAGS: ETRD, ETTC, LY, MASS, MCAP, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: GOP SIGNS CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS MAINTENANCE CONTRACT WITH LIBYA   Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde,, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (C)  On August 11, MFA (Americas) Director General Sohail Mahmood advised the DCM that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) has entered into a contract with Libya to perform maintenance work on two conventional weapons systems, the ANZA surface-to-air missiles and Baktar-Shikan (\"armour piercing\") anti-tank weapons.  Mahmood said that Libya originally purchased both systems through the Khan Research Laboratories'(KRL) conventional weapons branch.  Libya recently requested the maintenance contract for the systems, which has been executed through KRL.  In response to follow-up questions by the DCM, Mahmood said that he would forward information to the Embassy soonest on when the weapons systems were originally sold to Libya, the dollar value of the maintenance contract and when work under the contract will begin. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE132517", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/12/2006 12:46", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015981  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PTER, MOPS, UNSC, IS, LE, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCH DELIVERED ON UN SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION ON LEBANON  REF: STATE 132517  1.  Polcouns delivered reftel demarche on the UNSC Lebanon Resolution to MFA UN Director Syed Haider Shah on August 12.  2.  Shah responded that Pakistan was not in a position to comment at this time as it is still gathering information and developing its own assessment.  He noted however that Pakistan is still unclear on the timing and exact nature of the cessation of hostilities.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/16/2006 11:16", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 016148  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: POST CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR VISIT TO LAHORE  1. This is a request for post clearance for Political Officer C. Gordon Bonin to visit Lahore August 19-20. The purpose of the visit is personal travel to see the Badshahi Masjid, the Lahore Fort, the gate closing ceremony at the Wagah Border Crossing, and other sites and events as recommended by post. Details follow.  2. Bonin Diplomatic Passport Number 900484763.  3. Travel itinerary is as follows: July 19 depart Islamabad on PIA PK391 at 1500; arrive Lahore at 1550. July 20 depart Lahore on PIA PK388 at 2000; arrive Islamabad at 2050.  4.  Please provide transportation from/to the airport as well as in and around Lahore and to Wagah. Overnight lodging is to be provided at POR.  5. Thanks for all your assistance. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/17/2006 9:59", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 016256  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: PESHAWAR CLEARANCE REQUEST  1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Mohammed Motiwala, Rohit Nepal, Ragini Gupta, and Jennifer Maatta.  The party will travel to Peshawar for meetings with local officials and consultations at the Consulate.  2.  The party will travel via armored GOV.  The tentative itinerary is as follows:  August 18  Dep Islamabad on/around 1500; arrive at 1730. August 20  Dep Peshawar on/around 0800; arrive at 1030.  3.  Accommodations have already been arranged.  Any changes in itinerary will be communicated via e-mail to post.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/17/2006 13:07", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016266  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PGOV, PK, MOPS, AF, MASS, MCAP, PTER SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES BALOCHISTAN SECURITY ISSUES  ISLAMABAD 00016266  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, DSCG 05-01, January 2005, Edition 1, Reason: 1.4 (B,D)   1.  (C)  Summary:  During the Ambassador,s August 10-11 visit to Balochistan, Governor Owais Ahmed Ghani said that Pakistan,s anti-Taliban efforts is currently focused on expelling undocumented Afghans, but that there is no long-term plan for dealing with the Afghan population.  Ghani believes that the security situation in the province has turned a corner for the better.  The Balochistan Frontier Corps (FC) Commander requested increased US funding to increase the FC,s intelligence capabilities and to equip a planned FC hospital, as his forces have become the frontline troops for stopping cross-border raids by anti-Coalition militias (ACMs) and fighting provincial insurgents. End summary.  The Taliban   2.   (C)  Meeting in Quetta on August 10, the Ambassador commended Governor Ghani for the government,s renewed effort to dislodge Taliban members hiding in Balochistan.   Ghani described a campaign focused against illegal Afghan refugees.  The government is picking up all Afghans without proper documentation and expelling those who are \"harmless\" and holding those who are \"suspicious.\" Of 240-some Afghans arrested in mid July, four fell into the \"suspicious\" category.  Ghani noted that many Pakistanis view the Taliban differently from al-Qaeda, because the Taliban are Afghans (i.e., not foreigners imported into the region).  He admitted that the GOP has no long-term policy in place for dealing with the Afghans in Pakistan.  Ghani considered the continued presence of hundreds of thousands of Afghan refugees a burden on Pakistan, but said that Pakistan cannot repatriate all the refugees at once, given the destabilizing effect this could have on the fragile Afghan government.  Noting that he is a Pashtun \"like Karzai,\" Ghani asked the Ambassador to tell Karzai \"not to bad mouth\" the GOP.  3.   (C)  Ghani described the current security situation in the province as improving.   Referring to operations in eastern Balochistan against insurgent Baloch tribal leader Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti, Ghani said \"we are in a mopping up period...we are over the hump.\" The Governor said that a meeting with local residents in central Balochistan encapsulated the changed situation: a local man told him that, over the years, the tribal leaders had done nothing for the Baloch people and that, until recently, neither had the GOP. If the government provided electricity and other tangible aspects of development, the man continued, the local population would take care of the nawabs.  Ghani observed that  \"things are now happening on the ground...(the people) can see things happening.\"  He believes that the majority of tribal people understand that Nawabs Bugti and Marri suppressed development and modernization by force; he credited the government,s support for education as strengthening the middle class and diluting the influence of the tribal and feudal leaders. It is now up to the government to ensure that young, educated Balochis had jobs and are able to participate in the province,s development, he said.  4.  (C)  In a separate meeting, Balochistan Frontier Corps (FC) commander General Shujaat Dar offered the Ambassador a contrasting view of the province,s security situation.  Dar said that the FC--a paramilitary force of locally-raised troops--seized more narcotics than any other security force in the province and that it suffered more casualties than any other security force, including the Army.   Dar laid out the difficulties FC forces faced in an operation at the town of Baramshah, which straddles the border on the road between Balochistan and Lashkar Gah, the capital of Helmand Province, Afghanistan.  His forces reconnoitered the village, taking photos of a drug factory on the Afghan side of the border, before coming under fire. In the ensuing firefight, his  ISLAMABAD 00016266  002.2 OF 002   troops escaped, losing five men while killing twelve. He now has 500 troops encircling the village, blocking supplies in or out, until those who killed his troops are handed over. The villagers, however, can elude the FC cordon through \"a backdoor\" to Afghanistan.  5.  (C)  Dar said that FC troops supporting CFC-A Operation Mountain Thrust had established 36 new checkpoints or posts and are now stopping \"nomadic movement\" across the frontier. The FC would not allow nomads crossing the border to become a source of illegal activity or to sneak Taliban in or out of Pakistan.  6.  (C)  The Baramshah operation shows \"my boys aren,t afraid of anything,\" Dar said, but they need better equipment, better training, and better intelligence to do their job.  He complained that Pakistan,s Anti-Narcotics Force (ANF) receives more USG financial support than the FC.  Dar specifically asked for USG funding to increase the FC,s intelligence capabilities, including UAV support, as waiting for the intelligence to go up the chain of command \"takes a helluva lot of time.\" Dar also asked whether USG funds for the FC could be disbursed at a faster pace and whether the U.S. could fund the planned increase in FC forces.  Dar expects that, by December 2006, the growth in FC troops will outpace available vehicles and other equipment.  Dar questioned whether the GOP would follow through on funding commitments for FC expansion because of the budgetary constraints facing Islamabad in the next four to five years. The Ambassador replied that the U.S. commitment to the FC expansion is unchanged.  7.   (C)  Dar concluded by requesting USG support to equip a new FC hospital,  explaining that the Army currently charges the FC--including combat casualties--the same rate it charges civilians treated at the hospital. This angered Dar because, \"We have the highest casualty rates.\"  While praising his relationship with the commander of the Army,s 12th Corps, Dar expressed frustration that the FC must rely on the facilities and capabilities of other security forces, as he wants the FC to be \"dynamite in its own right.\"  Pakistani Coast Guard--Gwadar   8.   (C) During his August 11 visit to Gwadar, the Ambassador met LTC Mohammed Tariq, commanding officer of the Pakistani Coast Guards 3 Battalion. Tariq told the Ambassador that USG assistance to the Coast Guards has increased the force,s mobility and reaction time, improved surveillance capabilities, as well as communications and command and control.  ODRP has provided Gamma Ray scanners, marine radar, binoculars, vehicles, as well as funding for 16 observation towers in the 240 kilometers of coastline the Gwadar battalion oversaw. ODRP had also funded the renovation of four fast patrol boats and will provide six rugged hulled inflatable boats, ten more observation towers, and a mobile command and control center.  NAS provided the Coast Guards with vehicles, and communication and surveillance equipment. Tariq reviewed the number of illegal immigrants his battalion had intercepted, as well as the amount of hashish and liquor confiscated, revealing marked increases in both, which he attributed to improved capabilities.  (Note: The Pakistani Coast Guards area of responsibility is the coastline--not offshore--and reaches as far as 120 kilometers inland.) BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/18/2006 2:14", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016269  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, ECON, EAID SUBJECT: GWADAR: THE NEARLY BLANK CANVAS  1. (U) Summary. During the Ambassador,s August 10-11 visit to Gwadar, Balochistan, provincial and Gwadar Development Authority (GDA) officials laid out their grand vision for the port,s future--which they hope will someday rival Dubai, providing a key transshipment point for trade with Afghanistan and the Central Asian states.  Local town officials had simpler and more pressing needs: a reliable drinking water supply, better schools so their children could compete for jobs as the port and city grew, and improved medical facilities. The first phase of the port construction project has been completed, with signs of continuing construction around the city--in particular a Pearl Continental hotel perched on cliffs above the city--and a three-fold increase in the city,s population, Gwadar remains are remote, fishing town surrounded by desert. End summary.  2. (U) This cable on the port city of Gwadar is one of two cables on the Ambassador,s visit to Balochistan. Septel will address security matters, including counter-narcotics and anti-Taliban, discussed in meetings in Quetta with provincial and paramilitary officials, including the Balochistan Frontier Corps Commander.  The Vision   3. (U) During his August 11 visit to Gwadar, the Ambassador told provincial and local officials that the USG supports the port project as a means to open trade to Central Asia. The Ambassador also emphasized that the people of Gwadar should be  \"in the forefront of those who benefit from the mega project.\"  Governor Owais Ahmed Ghani described Gwadar as  \"a clean, flat canvas\" for development in the region, envisioning a future \"ports and sports city,\" that would include a dozen golf courses and which could be ready to bid on the Olympics twenty years hence. The Director General of the GDA said the work is underway on a sports complex that would include a cricket oval, fields for soccer and field hockey and an indoor sports facility.  4. (U) Both Governor Ghani and Provincial Chief Minister Jam Mohammad Yousuf said that President Musharraf has approved a 50-year plan for further expansion of the port and city. By 2055, the port should include specialized terminals for handling oil, LNG, LPG, oil refineries and storage, ship repairing facilities, a ferry terminal, expanded capacity to handle container ships, warehouses and storage yards.  5. (U) Even though the first phase of the port project is almost complete, local political officials spoke in terms of the port,s inauguration being \"a few years away.\" Dredging continues in the harbor to deepen the channel to 14.5 meters, allowing large ships to dock at the port. The additional dredging by a Chinese contractor should be completed by December. Negotiations are underway for a port operator; six major international corporations have expressed interest in the project, according to GDA officials.  The Locals   6. (U) While Governor Ghani said that a small committee of citizens from Gwadar has been formed to advise the Development Authority in its planning, local officials denied this, saying that they had not been included in planning. The local leaders claimed that the people of Gwadar are pleased that their city is being developed, but also fearful that local jobs and businesses will be displaced by development and that an influx of outsiders could make natives a minority in their own city. District officials are also dealing with a looming drinking water crisis; the lack of quality education and inadequate local medical facilities.  7. (U) Some local officials also worried that insufficient  ISLAMABAD 00016269  002 OF 003   attention is being paid to the preservation of old Gwadar City, which sits on a narrow peninsula extending perpendicular from the coastline to a high headland, which has cliffs 150 meters to 400 meters high. Provincial Chief Minister Jam Mohammad Yousuf opposed efforts to move people out of Gwadar,s Old Town, but was not averse to relocating fishermen to a new jetty off the mainland. (Note:  In the end, it was not clear how port development project would affect Old Gwadar: for example, the GDA Director General showed the Ambassador plans to run a multi-lane road directly over the Old City, saying that people would be given incentives to move to new housing schemes to make way for the roadway. In contrast, an engineer overseeing the project said that a new road would be built along the East Bay shore, so avoid the Old Town. End note.)  Water   8. (U) Local political officials cited a drinking water shortage arising from the jump in district,s population from 40,000 to 130,000 residents in recent years as a serious development problem. There is no underground water in Gwadar and a nearby reservoir is running dry, now holding less than two months supply after a year-long drought.  Residents must pay to receive water trucked in by tankers. Currently, there is only one unreliable desalinization plant in the district; plans for a large desalinization plant are still on the drawing board.  9. (U) The GDA Director General told the Ambassador that it will drill eleven new tube wells to ease the current shortage, adding that a California-based company has applied to build a 25-million gallon desalinization plant.  The district also plans to build a new dam to catch rainwater northeast of the city on the mainland. In the long-run, Gwadar will have to depend on desalinization for drinking water.  Education   10. (U) All local interlocutors told the Ambassador that Gwadar needs better educational facilities, so that local children can qualify for jobs in the port and city development project. Until new local high schools and technical schools are built, local officials are looking to federal and provincial authorities to subsidize Gwadar students to be trained at Port Karachi and Port Qasim in port operations.  11. (U) Coast Guard battalion commander LTC Mohammed Tariq told the Ambassador that he also faces difficulties keeping young captains and majors in the area because of the lack of quality schools. He requested USG support for a school that the Coast Guards would oversee. The battalion has acquired the land for the school; the next step would be drawing and retaining quality teachers from places like Karachi. Without committing to the project, the Ambassador commended this idea, noting that it parallels a schools program run by the Army 11th Corps in the NWFP.  The Ambasasdor also mentioned USAID,s teacher-training projects in Gwadar, as well as its support for school renovations.   Approximately 600 local teachers have graduated from the USAID training program, while the USG has provided roughly 22 million rupees (approximately USD 370,000) for local school facility improvements.  Connecting Gwadar to the World   12. (U) The Governor and GDA officials previewed future projects to tie Gwadar more closely to the rest of Pakistan and connect the port to Afghanistan and Central Asia. The  ISLAMABAD 00016269  003 OF 003   recently-completed Karachi-Gwadar coastal highway has cut travel time from a day to just eight hours. Now, coastal fishing villages can quickly move get their catch to market, creating a boat-building boom, but also leading to complaints by local fishermen that competitors from Sindh are now encroaching on their waters. According to the Governor, 400 kilometers of roads are now under construction or planned within Gwadar.  When told that road construction would be delayed if the government had to pay for land, the Governor said, some residents surrendered their properties gratis. The government compensated those who lost a house, productive agricultural lands, or who simply offered up their property for roads.  Roads running to the northeast will eventually connect Gwadar to Quetta, the NWFP, and southern Punjab; a new road to the north could linked into the Herat-Qandahar highway in Afghanistan, facilitating trade with Central Asia. A new, expanded airport is planned for Gwadar, which is only a half-hour flight from the Persian Gulf states. Long-term transportation plans include a ferry service connecting Gwadar to Karachi, Oman and other Gulf states, as existed until the 1970s. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE134133", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/18/2006 11:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016302  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR P, EUR, NEA, PM, IO  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/18/2016 TAGS: IS, LE, MARR, MOPS, PK, PREL, UN SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  SOLITICITING UNIFIL CONTRIBUTIONS  REF: STATE 134133  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable contains an action request; please see para. 5.  2.  (C)  On August 18, poloff presented reftel points to MFA (UN) Director Haider Shah.  Poloff also asked about the accuracy of August 18 reports in the Pakistani press quoting Foreign Minister Kasuri, traveling in the Middle East with an OIC delegation, as saying that the Lebanese PrimeMinister had specifically asked that Pakistan participate in the UNIFIL mission and that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) is seriously considering the request.  3.  (C)  After excusing himself to telephone his superiors in the UN Directorate, Shah returned saying that he was authorized to say only that the GOP has not/not made any commitment to contribute troops to UNIFIL.  He could not comment on whether the press had quoted FM Kasuri accurately or whether the GOP is considering a contribution.  Shah explained that the Pakistan Mission at UNHQ has attended meetings of troop-contributing countries (TCCs) organized by DPKO, but only in the capacity of a member of the peace-building committee, not as a contributor.  4.  (C)  Shah asked poloff about media reports (source unknown) that Israel opposes UNIFIL troop contributions by Moslem countries and/or countries that do not have diplomatic relations with Israel.  Poloff replied that she had not seen such reports, but that she would seek additional information from Washington.  5.  (C)  Action request:  Post requests guidance from the Department on any Israeli redlines regarding which UN member states it would consider acceptable as UNIFIL contributors. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06SECSTATE133051|06SECSTATE134892|06SECSTATE136318", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/22/2006 4:33", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 016434  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: POST CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR STAFFDEL SANOK VISIT TO MUSHAF PAF BASE, 26 AUGUST 06  REF: A. SECSTATE 133051      B. SECSTATE 134892      C. SECSTATE 136318  1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Staffdel Sanok, Poloff Gordon Bonin, ODRP Major Benjamin Janes, ODRP Colonel Ronald Huther and FPD Greg Carter to visit Pakistan Air Force Mushaf Airbase, Sargodha, Punjab, on August 26. Travel to/from Mushaf Airbase is to be provided by PAF. No assistance from Post is necessary. Embassy control officer information, names of those in the staffdel and their itinerary follows.  2. Control Officer: Gordon Bonin, POLOFF, office 051-208-2689, mobile 0300-501-2648, boninc@state.gov or bonincg@state.sgov.gov.  3. STEPHANIE SANOK REGINA BURGESS Lt. Col. CRAIG GREENE Lt. Cmdr. MARK J. FEDOR KELLY BULLINER JULIAN ANTHONY HAYWOOD  4. Itinerary--Saturday 26 August 2006 -1000 DEPART FOR CHAKLALA AIRBASE -1045 ARRIVE CHAKLALA AIRBASE -1045 LOAD ON AIRCRAFT -1100 DEPART CHAKLALA -1140 ARRIVE MUSHAF AIRBASE, SARGODHA -1140 MOVE TO BRIEFING -1200 BRIEFING ON SECURITY CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES AT MUSHAF -1400 LUNCH AT MUSHAF AIRBASE -1500 TOUR OF MUSHAF AIRBASE -1700 MOVEMENT TO AIRCRAFT AND LOADING -1730 DEPART MUSHAF AIRBASE -1820 ARRIVE CHAKLALA AIRBASE, RAWALPINDI  4. Post's prompt attention to this clearance request is appreciated.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06SECSTATE133051|06SECSTATE134892|06SECSTATE136318", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/22/2006 4:39", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 016441  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, OREP, AFIN, PK, UK, AF SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL SANOK, AUGUST 23-27  REF: A. SECSTATE 133051      B. SECSTATE 134892      C. SECSTATE 136318  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Stephanie Sanok, Regina Burgess, Julian A. Haywood, LTC Craig Greene, Mark J. Fedor, and Kelly Bulliner from August 23 to August 27.  The purpose of the visit is fact-finding concerning F-16 aircraft security in Pakistan and narcotics programs.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Gordon Bonin.  He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2689; Cell: 0300-501-2648.  3.  An expeditor, car and driver will meet visitors upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad on August 23. Transportation will be provided to and from the airport on August 24 when Staffdel undertakes day-trip to Kabul, as well as for the Staffdel's return to Islamabad on August 25. And transportation will be provided to the airport on the day of departure, August 27.  Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  4.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  5. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry. If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  6.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  7.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A car bomb damaged the U.S. consulate in Karachi in June 2002 and killed several by-standers.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  8.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  9.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  10.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  11. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED). TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE137429", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/24/2006 1:58", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 016721  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE PASS TO ALL SOUTH ASIA COLLECTIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: UNGA, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION ELECTION  REF: STATE 137429   1. (U) On August 23, poloff delivered reftel demarche and diplomatic note to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (UN-I) Director Haider Shah.  Shah said that, in recent weeks, the MFA's missions around the world had received requests from other countries for support of their candidates to the International Law Commission.  Shah added that he would take delivered points into consideration and would notify post when the Government of Pakistan was ready to support a candidate. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE1582324", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/24/2006 12:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016739   E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2016 TAGS: PINR, ECIN, EFIN, KTFN, PK SUBJECT: ISLAMIC BANKING IN PAKISTAN (C-TN6-00207)  REF: STATE 1582324  Classified By: DOS CLASSIFICATION GUIDE BY MARY TOWNSWICK  1.  (C)  Summary.  With limited government support, Islamic banking has gained momentum in Pakistan in the past three years.  The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) reports that the capital base of the Islamic banking system has more than doubled since 2003 as the number of Islamic banks operating in Pakistan rose from one to four.  A media analysis of Islamic banking in Pakistan cites an increase in the number of conventional banks providing Islamic banking services from three to ten -- leading to a four-fold increase in the bank branches offering Islamic banking services between 2003-2006.  The SBP states that under Pakistani law, Sharia Boards do not regulate Islamic banks; the State Bank of Pakistan does. Sharia Boards are limited to monitoring Islamic banking transactions to ensure compliance with Sharia principles. Moreover, SBP notes that it subjects Islamic banks and Islamic banking transactions to the same anti-money laundering prudential regulations and general regulatory framework as conventional banks.  End Summary.  ---------------------------- THE RISE OF ISLAMIC BANKING IN PAKISTAN ----------------------------  2.  (C)  Kamran Shehzad, the Executive Director of SBP, and Pervaiz Saeed, head of the Islamic Banking Department at SBP, state that while SBP does not provide any specific incentives to promote the establishment of Islamic banks, SBP has facilitated the growth of Islamic banking in Pakistan by allowing commercial banks to establish Islamic banking subsidiaries and provide full Islamic banking facilities through dedicated branches -- leading to a four-fold increase in the bank branches offering Islamic banking services between 2003-2006.  Shehzad and Saeed also note that SBP established the Islamic Banking Department at SBP in September 2003 to approve Islamic banking license applications which enabled the establishment of three Islamic banks in the past three years.  Thus, the capital base of the Islamic banking system has more than doubled since 2003 as the number of Islamic banks operating in Pakistan rose from one to four.  SBP reports that the following four Islamic banks operate in Pakistan today:  Meezan Bank, Albaraka Bank, Dubai Islamic Bank and Bank Islamic Pakistan.  SBP indicates that it has recently issued licenses to two additional Islamic banks -- Emirate Global Islamic Bank and First Dawood Islamic Bank, which have yet to establish operations.  SBP officials link the rise in Islamic banking in Pakistan to world-wide increased interest in Islamic banking.  Per SBP, Islamic banks control approximately 2.2% of total bank assets in Pakistan.  3.  (U)  The July 31-August 6 Pakistan and Gulf Economist magazine cover story analyzes the status of Islamic banking in Pakistan.  While the magazine reports that Islamic banking is taking hold in Pakistan -- citing the increase in the number of conventional banks providing Islamic banking services (from three to ten between 2003-2006) and the increase in bank branches offering Islamic banking services (from seventeen to seventy-three) -- it laments the slow pace of growth.  ------------------------------------- ISLAMIC BANKS FOLLOW SAME REGULATORY FRAMEWORK AS COMMERCIAL BANKS -------------------------------------  4.  (C)  SBP's Shehzad and Saeed state that Islamic banks must adhere to the same general regulatory framework as interest-based banks.  Shehzad and Saeed note that this means that the same anti-money laundering prudential regulations apply to Islamic banks and Islamic banking transactions as to commercial banks and transactions.  Financial disclosure requirements are also the same.  SBP indicates it requires the same minimum capital paid up requirement of Rs. 2 billion (equivalent to 33.33 million USD) and minimum capital adequacy ratio of 8% for establishing an Islamic bank. Islamic banks also must follow the same rules if they wish to open new branches.  Shehzad and Saeed describe Islamic banks as public limited companies that are listed on the stock exchanges of Pakistan.  Accordingly, Islamic banks are required to offer 50% of their shares to the public.  SBP officials confirm that SBP scrutinizes the funding sources and financial products of prospective Islamic banks, as it does for commercial banks.  According to SBP, the oversight structure and corporate governance framework are the same for Islamic banks and interest-based banks.  ------------------------------------ SHARIA BOARDS INSPECT AND REGULATE TRANSACTIONS NOT BANKS ------------------------------------  5.  (C)  SBP officials affirm that under Pakistani law SBP regulates the Islamic banks through the same regulatory framework as applied to commercial banks.  Shehzad and Saeed state that the role of Sharia boards is limited to ensuring that all Islamic banking transactions are in conformity with Sharia principles.  Per SBP, the Sharia board is comprised of two Sharia scholars, one chartered accountant, one lawyer and one banker.  Saeed is the Secretary of the Sharia board, whose role is to safeguard SBP's interests -- which he states is primarily to ensure Islamic banking systems and transactions do not pose a greater money-laundering risk -- and look after the interests of the Islamic banking industry by making certain that Islamic banking transactions follow Sharia principles.  With these additional safeguards in place, Saeed contends that Islamic banking transactions are more secure from illicit flows than regular transactions. SBP officials note that Islamic banks in Pakistan do not deal in forwards, options and longer-term financing schemes. Shehzad also reports that Islamic banks' decisions regarding which currencies to use are determined by market forces.  6.  (C)  Comment.  Given the regulatory structure applied to Islamic banks and Islamic banking transactions in Pakistan, post does not view the Islamic banking system in Pakistan as more vulnerable to use or abuse by money launderers, terrorists or their financiers than traditional interest-based banks.  If intelligence reports or other information to the contrary exists, post would be interested to know and will follow-up.  Though Islamic banking still has not penetrated the mainstream market in Pakistan, its market share is growing.  Post will continue to monitor the evolution of Islamic banking in Pakistan.  End Comment.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/25/2006 2:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016800  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/24/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: NO CONFIDENCE VOTE ON THE PM: SOUND, FURY, SLIGHT SIGNIFICANCE  Classified By: Charge d'Affairs Peter W.Bodde, Reason: 1.4 (B and,D)   1. (C) SUMMARY: Opposition parties joined forces on August 23, tabling a long-anticipated, no confidence vote on Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz.  The opposition knows that it does not have the votes needed to succeed, but seems determined to relish this opportunity to ramp up its criticism of the Musharraf government in the run up to the 2007 general elections. Given the ephemeral nature of this \"coalition,\" cooperation on subsequent issues remains highly unlikely. END SUMMARY.  2.  (U) After a summer of press play, five parlimentary components signed on to an attempt to bring a vote of no confidence against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz: the Islamist Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA), the populist Pakistan People's Party (PPP), the conservative Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N), and a collection of  Balouch and Pashtoon nationalists and members of the Assembly from the Frontier and Tribal Areas (FATA) affiliated with or sympatheic to the MMA.  Between them, they control perhaps 141 votes. In contrast, PM Aziz's coalition numbers 201 votes.  3.  (C) The no confidence motion is a 17-page petition, backed up by a 500-page \"charge sheet\" of press clippings and commentaries involving 30 alleged major financial irregularities and scandals during the Aziz administration. Article 95 of the constitution requires the Assembly vote on the motion within seven days, by August 29.  High theater and histrionics are predicted for the interim.  4.  (C) COMMENT: Hoping to benefit from divisions within the ruling coalition, the opposition argued for a secret vote on the no confidence measure, but the government opted for a more disciplined public balloting, despite opposition warnings of a protest if a secret ballot is not used.  The GOP decision to not allow a secret ballot is the conservative route, given the virtual certainty that the no cofidence motion will fail.  Foreshadowing the transitory nature of the opposition's cooperation, the MMA is already complaining that the government introduced its amendments to the Hudood Ordinance on August 21 in a deliberate effort to divide the opposition before the no confidence vote could be tabled. The opposition was never united -- except around the issue of the no confidence vote.  In fact, the PPP, the driving force behind the no confidence motion, worked with the government in order to introduce the Hudood Ordinance amendments in the first place. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE135928", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2006 11:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 016934  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, OREP, AFIN, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR KERRY KRONSTADT, CRS  REF: STATE 135928  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Senior CRS analyst Kerry Kronstadt from September 16, 2006 to September 20, 2006.  The purpose of the visit is to meet with Embassy, GOP and other officials as part of his CRS portfolio.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Ralph Anske, in the Political Section.  He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2655; Fax: 92-51-208-2537; Cell: 0300-856-4709.  3.  The Serena not being available, a single room has been reserved at the Marriott Hotel for arrival on September 16 and departure on September 20.  Hotel contact number is 92 51 282-6121, confirmation number is 911118.  4.  A car and driver will meet visitor upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad.  We await information regarding time of arrival flight as well as carrier and flight number. Transportation will be provided to the airport on the day of departure.  Please inform control officer of any change in itinerary.  5.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  6. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows &Work at the U.S. Embassy8 or &Official Business8 as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  7.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  8.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006.  A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  All DOD military and civilian personnel on TDY, TAD, or PCS orders to Pakistan are required to notify the Force Protection Detachment (FPD), US Embassy, Pakistan, of their travel plan/itinerary.  Notifications myst be made well in advance prior to arrival in country, principally if FDP support is needed.  Upon arrival into country, DOD personnel are required to check in with the FPD ro receive a current threat briefing, as well as to be reminded of applicable force protection countermeasures.  Failure to comply with this requirement may result in either denial of current or future country clearances.  FPD e-mail addresses are as follows: FPDPakistan@state.sgov,gov and FPDPakistan@state.gov.   ISLAMABAD 00016934  002 OF 004   9.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French submarine engineers.  As well, an October 2004 there was a recent bombing in the lobby of at the Islamabad Marriott that injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) must move their personnel from one hotel to the other after the seventh day and should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the backside away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on theirs floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  10.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-568-5170 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-527-9801 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000  11.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver,s License is not valid in Pakistan.  12. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to  ISLAMABAD 00016934  003 OF 004   American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State,s Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC,s contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department,s Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations  ISLAMABAD 00016934  004 OF 004   except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2006 11:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 016935  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, PK SUBJECT: POST CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR POLITICAL OFFICER RALPH ANSKE   1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Ralph Anske for the period August 31 - September 1, 2006.  2. Post's prompt attention to this clearance request is appreciated.  Should approval be granted, schedule will be discussed with post via e-mail.  .  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2006 12:07", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016944  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER SUBJECT: DEATH OF NAWAB BUGTI, BALOCH TRIBAL INSURGENT LEADER  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Derived from DSCG 05-01, d  1. (C) Summary: The killing of Baloch tribal insurgent leader Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti by security forces on Saturday has dismayed politicians across the political spectrum, including members of the party that President Musharraf relies on to run the country, and triggered riots in a limited number of cities in Balochistan. Government politicians are now playing down the initial military triumphalism at the death of Nawab Bugti. The people of Balochistan had an ambivalent relationship with Nawab Bugti: some saw him as a great nationalist leader fighting for the province's economic rights, others saw him as a self-serving tribal lord whose violent tactics against the economic infrastructure hurt the people of the province, not just the central government. End summary.  ----------- How He Died -----------  2. (U) There are conflicting stories about how Nawab Bugti was tracked down. Some press reports say that the security forces located him through a satellite telephone call. However, the government has stated that an attack on an Army helicopter on August 23 led security forces to launch an operation the next day that eventually led to the assault on the cave in which Bugti was hiding on Saturday. As many as 27 government security forces and 60 militants were killed in the attack, according to press reports. The assault was described as a \"commando\" operation involving officers from the Pakistan Army's elite Special Services Group. The government asserts that its forces came under heavy fire from the cave and when they returned fire and attempted to enter it, the roof collapsed, killing all inside, including a number of soldiers and officers. Nawab Bugti's presence in the cave was confirmed by captured militants, according to the government. Tikka Khan, editor of the Urdu-daily Islam, told Embassy that if the Nawab was located by satellite phone it proves the government was specifically searching for him and makes his killing a deliberate criminal act.  3. (U) The start of the operation against Nawab Bugti on August 24 coincided with what was described as a \"first-ever\" Bugti tribal jirga, attended by thousands of government-allied tribesmen at which they, in essence, deposed Nawab Bugti by declaring the \"end to the Nawabi system\" and pledging their support to the government.  4. (U) Initially, there were reports that two of Nawab Bugti's grandsons, including his heir-apparent Brahamdagh, were also in the cave, along with Mir Balaach Khan Marri, son of Marri tribal leader Nawab Khair Bux Marri. However, President Musharraf and the government spokesman would not confirm whether Nawab Bugti's grandsons or Balaach Marri died in the attack. Agha Shahid Bugti, the Nawab's son-in-law, also refused to confirm whether the grandsons survived or were killed in the operation, according to one press report. A separate press report stated that one of Nawab Bugti's grandsons was captured; a spokesman for the Marri tribe said that Balaach Marri and both Bugti grandsons were alive. As of Monday, bodies were still being dug out of the cave rubble.  5. (U) Nawab Bugti, who was reportedly 79, was both a former provincial governor and chief minister. In 1946, Nawab Bugti took over leadership of the Bugti tribe (Nawab is a title meaning prince), which is currently estimated as having 200,000 members and a militia of 5,000 fighters. Since early 2005, he had led his tribe's armed resistance to the government. In recent months, the government security forces, led by Frontier Corps troops backed by Army helicopters and artillery, had driven Bugti into hiding in the mountains.  -----------------------------------  ISLAMABAD 00016944  002 OF 002   Crowing Soldiers, Sober Politicians -----------------------------------  6. (C) In the aftermath of Nawab Bugti death, General Musharraf said that the government would take \"every step\" necessary to extend its writ into Balochistan. The tone of the initial news reports was of a military success. But the tenor changed as opposition politicians, including those from beyond Balochistan, began criticizing the killing. Journalists and nationalist politicians within Balochistan, including politicians opposed to the sardari system, told Embassy that the Nawab's death would be a rallying point for opponents of the government and could lead to increased violence against Punjabis in the province. (Note: The federal government and Army are seen as being dominated by Punjab Province. End note.)  7. (C) Even top leaders in the governing PML-Q were circumspect in their comments about Nawab Bugti's death. Senator Mushahid Hussain, PML-Q General Secretary, told Polcouns that Nawab Bugti's death was regrettable and avoidable. Mushahid and PML-Q President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain have arranged for the Army to transport two of Nawab Bugti's sons to the cave site where he died, so that they can oversee the recovery of the body, which will be turned over to the family for burial in Dera Bugti.  8. (U) Newspaper editorials called for the end of military action and the start of negotiations to resolve the province's grievances, which stem from the belief that Islamabad has not given the province a fair share of the revenues generated by its mineral wealth or an adequate share of the jobs in ongoing development projects in the province. Mushahid Hussain said the death creates the opportunity to revisit the recommendations of a committee he led last year that called for increasing economic opportunities in Balochistan, investing in social infrastructure, limiting settler influence in elections, and increasing provincial autonomy and control over natural gas revenues.  9. (U) Nawab Bugti's death sparked protests and riots in Quetta, Balochistan's capital, and other cities, in which at least three people were killed and 50 injured. In Quetta roughly 600 protesters were arrested. On Monday, Quetta experienced a citywide strike, with roads empty and most shops closed. In addition, the main highways from Quetta to Karachi and Punjab Province were also blocked by protesters.  10. (C) Comment: The unrest triggered by Nawab Bugti's death has been confined, so far, to just five of Balochistan's 27 districts, with disturbances, however, also occurring in Karachi in Sindh Province. Crowds in Quetta were violent but not exceedingly large by Pakistani standards. One Embassy interlocutor said the size of the crowds was limited because people have known for months that the security forces where closing in on Nawab Bugti. Notably, members of Musharraf's ruling party are now emphasizing that Nawab Bugti died because the roof of the cave collapsed, as opposed to being killed directly by government troops. PML-Q leaders may be downplaying the military success because the party faces a no confidence vote in the National Assembly later this week. If Brahamdagh Bugti, the Nawab's anointed successor, was killed, the GOP would have eliminated the most likely leader to take the reins of the insurgency from Nawab Bugti. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14095|06ISLAMABAD15630|06ISLAMABAD6800", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2006 13:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016956  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2016 TAGS: PK, PGOV, KWMN, KDEM, PHUM SUBJECT: HUDOOD AMENDMENTS MOVED TO COMMITTEE AS ASSEMBLY CONSIDERS NO CONFIDENCE MOTION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 15630      B. ISLAMABAD 14095      C. ISLAMABAD 6800      D. GRENCIK-SACKS EMAIL 08/24/2006      E. LAHORE - SEPTEL  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C)  Summary and Introduction:  After a initial failure to convene a quorum on August 18, the Pakistan Muslim League-led (PML) government of Prime Minster Shaukat Aziz introduced a bill during the August 21 National Assembly session proposing amendments to the Hudood Ordinance, the draconian 1979 presidential order promulgated by General Zia-ul-Haq delineating the elements and punishment for offenses such as rape, adultery and perjury.  Entitled the \"Criminal Law Amendment (Protection of Women) Act, 2006\", the bill is a revised version of the government's initial draft, but one that retains critical provisions that, inter alia, distinguish rape from adultery, establish the concept of statutory rape and remove the restriction requiring the testimony of \"four male Muslim witnesses\" to sustain a rape charge.  (Note: Post has forward the full texts of both government's original draft and the bill as introduced to SCA/PB. End note.)  2. (C) Thanks to procedural connivance between the PML and opposition Pakistan People's Party (PPP), the Hudood bill was swiftly moved off the floor to a special multi-party committee, freeing the way for Parliamentary debate on the opposition's no confidence motion against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz (Ref C).  Although some women's/human rights activists decry the proposed amendments as falling far short of the mark, post believes that passage of the bill as it now stands would mark a significant step forward for Pakistani women, as well as for President Musharraf's vision of Enlightened Moderation.  End summary and introduction.  Pressure to Backslide ---------------------------- 3.  (C)  Little more than two weeks ago, Attorney General Makhdoom Amin Khan (the bill's principal drafter) shared with poloffs serious reservations regarding the amendment's prospects (Ref A), noting that several Cabinet member and PML party leaders were advocating amendments that would severely weaken the carefully crafted bill. Throughout the second week of August, local media carried stories detailing calls from both government politicians and opposition Islamist parties to walk back the amendments.  By mid-August, the headlines had shifted to President Musharraf's personal intervention, first with Cabinet members and then with PML parliamentary managers, admonishing them to move the bill forward smartly with minimal compromise.  Parliamentary Theater ----------------------------  4.  (C)  Political drama of the highest order followed the government's introduction of the amendments on August 21.  As expected, members from the opposition Islamist Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) virulently attacked the bill as \"un-Islamic,\" literally tearing their copies of the bill into small pieces they flung to the floor.  As the debate raged, Information Minister Durrani declared to the Assembly (and television cameras) that by shredding copies of the bill -- papers which contained language with direct quotes from holy texts  -- the MMA members had \"desecrated\" the Quran.   As shamed MMA (and grandstanding PML) members scrambled to retrieve the defiled scraps of paper from the Assembly floor, the PPP moved to establish a special committee to review the bill.  Embarrassed by the unforeseen fallout from the bill-shredding incident, even the MMA did not object to moving the bill from the floor to the committee.  5.  (C)  In a conversation immediately following the August 21 session, Chairman of the National Reconstruction Bureau(PML) Daniyal Aziz told poloffs that the tactic of moving the bill to a special Assembly committee required  ISLAMABAD 00016956  002 OF 003   close cooperation between government and PPP parliamentary leaders.  According to Aziz, the committee's mandate is severely limited, restricted to the sole question of whether any of the bill's provisions contravene the Quran.  Moving the bill to the committee not only prevented extended debate on the floor by MMA opponents, but also pens in the MMA from proposing broad revisions the bill's language.  Confident that the bill has been drafted in strict conformance with the Quran, Aziz predicted that the MMA efforts to attack the text would quickly run out of steam.  (Note:  Other contacts have told post that the committee's mandate is not restricted, but that there is little chance that the bill will emerge from the committee with any significant revisions.  End note.)  6.  (C)  Although publicly characterizing the government's proposed Hudood bill as \"too little, too late\" and decrying the government's timing as a deliberate attempt to split the opposition in advance of a no confidence motion, PPP leaders such as Information Secretary Sherry Rehman and Aitzaz Ahsen are working with the PML to advance a full-strength bill. Establishing a special committee nicely served PPP purposes, as moving the Hudood amendments off the floor allowed opposition parties to proceed with their long-discussed plan to present a no confidence motion against the government on August 23.  As the no confidence motion proceeds toward an expected August 29 vote, the special committee has concurrently begun its work, although not without attendant theatrics:  the PPP boycotted the committee's initial meeting in protest over the government's initiative to consult the MMA on the bill outside the Assembly and demanded that Religious Affairs Minister Ejaz-ul-Haq (son of Hudood progenitor General Zia-ul-Haq) be replaced as committee chairperson.  (Note:  The Assembly speaker granted the latter demand, appointing PML party whip as the committee chair. End note.)  Key Amendments ----------------------- 7.   (U)  A \"Statement of Objects and Reasons\" appended to the bill concisely presents the case for dramatic amendment to the Hudood Ordinance, stating directly that \"the object of this bill is to bring the laws relating to zina (sex outside of marriage) and qazf (perjury), in particular, in conformity with the stated objectives of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and...in particular to provide relief and protection to women against misuse and abuse of law.\"  The bill distinguishes between offenses and punishments mentioned in the Quran and Sunnah (which are sacrosanct and cannot be revised), such as zina and qazf, but addresses all offenses not defined in these holy texts as \"ta'zir\" offenses that are the subject of state legislation).  Many of the offenses, procedures and penalties in the current Hudood Ordinance, the Statement observes, are merely ta'zir and therefore amenable to revision as the State determines.  The bill moves numerous \"ta'zir\" provisions in the current Hudood Ordinance to the Pakistan Penal Code.  8.  (U)  The current Hudood Ordinance has led to the conflation of zina (sex outside of marriage) with zina-bil-jabr (rape), subjecting both to the same kinds of proof and punishment:  women who have been raped, but could not produce four adult male Muslim witness to corroborate the complaint would be automatically charged with, found guilty of and punished for zina.  The government's amendment severs this connection, moving the crime of rape to the criminal code, allowing the introduction of forensic evidence and protecting a raped woman from having her complaint used against her as an admission of non-marital sexual intercourse.  The amendments introduce the concept of statutory rape, denying defendant's the right to claim consent as a defense if the woman is under 16 years of age. Noting that the courts are often reluctant to find a defendant guilty in cases of gang rape because the current Hudood ordinance requires a penalty of death, the amendment adds the life imprisonment as a sentencing option.  9.  (C)  Under the current Hudood Ordinance, women whose marriage or divorce has not been properly registered have  ISLAMABAD 00016956  003 OF 003   been prevented from using these unions as a defense to a zina charges.  As many marriages and divorces in Pakistan are not registered, the amendment removes the requirement that a woman charged with adultery must prove that she had a \"valid\" marriage or divorce.   The amendments would codify in law earlier procedural orders that shift authority to bring a charge of adultery from the police (widely believed to act complicity with vengeful husbands) to the courts.   The amendment shifts the risk of a zina charge from the woman to the accuser: a complainant alleging zina must present four adult eyewitnesses to corroborate the accusation.  If the court finds the charge to be unsubstantiated, the accuser is by definition considered guilty of bearing false witness, the punishment for which is eighty lashes.  In the view of the bill's drafter, Attorney General Khan, this shift in the evidentiary and legal burden in zina cases precludes abusive husbands from persecuting their wives with legal vendettas.  Comment ------------ 10.  (C)  So far, public reaction to the government's bill is playing according to script.  With unremarkable predictability, the MMA and its Islamist supporters have initiated a loud campaign labeling the proposed Hudood Ordinance mendments as un-Islamic -- an accusation they hope will rouse their followers to a mass demonstration of resistance, but which has thus far fallen short.  On the other side of the spectrum, some women's and human rights activists maintain a maximalist position, excoriating President Musharraf for waiting seven years to put forward the amendments and declaring that nothing less than full repeal of Zia's Hudood Ordinance will be acceptable.  11.  (C)  After the downbeat assessment of the Attorney General on August 3 and subsequent rumors of revisions to appease Musharraf's more conservative allies (Ref B), poloffs were relieved to find that the bill as introduced to the Assembly retained the most significant amendments proposed in the government's original draft.  If adopted in its present form, the resulting statutory framework would significantly enhance the legal protections available to Pakistani women. POL's contacts in European embassies agree that the proposed amendments represent a dramatic step forward.  12.  (C)  National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz, tasked by President Musharraf to coordinate the political strategy for the amendments (Ref A), told Charge d'Affaires on August 26 that he expects the special committee to report the bill back to the Assembly in early September, following the vote on the no confidence motion.  Aziz and PML parliamentary leaders intend to see the bill successfully through an Assembly vote before Musharraf's September 9th departure to attended the NAM Summit and UNGA, believing that passage by one house will sufficiently insulate the President from criticism by women's rights activists during his visit to the U.S. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14349|06ISLAMABAD16269|06ISLAMABAD16944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/29/2006 4:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 016962  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (PARA MARKINGS)  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER, PINR SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN (2): THE GRIEVANCES  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14349      B. ISLAMABAD 16269      C. ISLAMABAD 16944  ISLAMABAD 00016962  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde,  Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary. While the Government of Pakistan (GOP) undertakes projects to develop Balochistan, in part to turn the province into a transit point linking Pakistan to western Afghanistan and the Central Asian states, it faces a distrustful and resentful provincial population. This wariness and antipathy extends beyond the handful of Baloch tribal leaders prone to insurrection. The province welcomes development, but is skeptical about who it will benefit. There is a widespread feeling that GOP action in Balochistan is geared toward benefiting Punjab and Sindh provinces, not Balochistan. This cable on the politics of Balochistan is the second in a series on the province--septel will look at the tribal uprising led by Nawab Bugti in the Dera Bugti and Kohlu districts. (Note: This cable was drafted prior to the reported death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti on August 26 (Ref C). End note.) End summary.  2. (U) GOP-planned \"mega projects\"--such as the expansion of the port at Gwadar (Ref B)--have re-ignited Baloch nationalist anger toward Islamabad. Even provincial members of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML), which is the leading coalition partner in governments at both the national and provincial levels, are wary of the proposed development schemes. According to PML member Rahila Durrani, \"We should get our share of the (natural) gas so that we don't need to ask the federal government for anything.\" Similarly, Maulvi Rehmatullah of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, Fazlur Rehman Faction (JUI-F) said that locals should receive priority in hiring at these projects and receive an education that prepares them for those jobs.  3. (U) According to nationalist leader and former provincial chief minister Akhtar Mengal, the Baloch are very skeptical that they will get anything out of oil and gas projects--such as the proposed Iran-Pakistan-India natural gas pipeline. He warned that such pipelines and other projects would not be secure until local people reaped the benefits of development. Nationalist Shahid Hassan Bugti of the Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP), said, the Baloch have \"a lot of bitter experience\" from the government's exploitation of the Sui gas fields, leading to the conclusion that there is \"strong centralization and not much consulting\" in government decisionmaking.  ------------------------ What do the Baloch Want? ------------------------  4. (U) Quite simply, the Baloch want greater autonomy within Pakistan. Shahid Bugti, a son-in-law of insurgent leader Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti (Ref C), said the current struggle is for \"our economic and political rights,\" not independence. Baloch nationalists accuse Punjab Province of treating Balochistan like a colony. Dr. Hayee Baloch, a nationalist political leader from the Makran Coast, told poloff that the Baloch feel like \"third rate\" citizens in their own province and have \"zero\" influence in the policymaking.  5. (U)  The people of the province want \"a fair share\" of revenues generated by the mines and gas fields in the province. Shahid Bugti claimed that, in 1990, the GOP owed Balochistan 600 million rupees (USD 10 million at today's exchange rate) in back royalties from the Sui gas fields alone; today the figure stands at 1 billion rupees (USD 16.7 million).  6. (U) Balochistan residents criticize the federal government for the lack of educational institutions in the province that  ISLAMABAD 00016962  002 OF 002   could prepare people for the skilled jobs available in the current development projects. In August 2006, local political officials in Gwadar told the Ambassador (Ref B) that their district needs better schools, including a new technical high school or college, so that their children could compete for jobs in the port.  7. (U) Residents hope that development benefits them, but there is a common fear among the people of Balochistan--Baloch and Pashtun alike--that the development projects will act as magnets for settlers from Punjab and Sindh, tipping the province's demographic balance. Baloch nationalists argue that settlers should not be allowed to vote until they had lived in the province for 15 years, and that there should be restrictions on outsiders buying land in Balochistan. Nationalists cite the experience of the Dera Bugti district which experienced an influx of outsiders who took jobs away from locals after natural gas was discovered in Sui in the 1950s.  ------------------------- Extra-judicial Detentions -------------------------  8. (C) A growing source of anger among the Baloch is the GOP's extra-judicial detention of political opponents. Many in the province suspect GOP security agencies such as Military Intelligence (MI), which overseas security operations in the province, and the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), of spiriting away political activists. In early August 2006, these disappearances became a focal point during a national parliamentary debate, with a rush of editorials entitled \"Those Who Vanished\" and \"These Mysterious 'Disappearances.'\" Shahzada Zulfiqar, correspondent for The Nation newspaper in Quetta, described these \"extra-judicial abductions (as) multiplying hatred against the state and the army.\"  ----------------------------------------- India's Suspected Meddling in Balochistan -----------------------------------------  9. (U) Islamabad has become increasingly agitated at India's growing influence in Afghanistan, and has hinted that New Delhi has a hand in Baloch unrest. Senior military officers are convinced that India has nine-to-twelve consulates along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. (Note: In fact, India has an embassy and four consulates in Afghanistan. End note.) In a speech to the nation on July 20, President Musharraf said the Baloch were receiving weapons from \"external sources.\" And on July 26, the State Minister for Information said publicly that the GOP has was evidence of foreign involvement in subversive activity in Balochistan, noting the proximity of Indian consulates in Zahedan, Iran, and Qandahar, Afghanistan.  ------- Comment -------  10. (C) The issue for Balochistan today is increased provincial autonomy to ensure that the province is the main beneficiary of development projects. For the GOP, which wants to develop the province as an anchor for regional trade, extending central government control and suppressing rebellious tribal militants is the first order of business. Fueling the calls for autonomy and control over Balochistan's mineral wealth, is a belief that the province would take in more than enough revenues from its gold and copper mines, its coal and natural gas fields to develop the province and provide for the native population. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14349|06ISLAMABAD16269|06ISLAMABAD16944|06ISLAMABAD16962", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/29/2006 10:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 016987  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (PARA MARKINGS)  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINR SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN (3): A RESTLESS HISTORY  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14349      B. ISLAMABAD 16269      C. ISLAMABAD 16944      D. ISLAMABAD 16962  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: Balochistan has a history of uprisings against Pakistani rule. Major insurrections occurred in 1947-48, 1958, throughout the 1960s, and 1973-77.  The Bugti tribe has been waging a localized insurgency since 2004. This cable on insurrections in Balochistan since the founding of Pakistan in 1947 is part of series on the political dynamics in Pakistan's largest but least-populated province. End summary.  2. (U) The Government of Pakistan's Balochistan problem began the day after partition in August 1947, when the Baloch Khan of Kalat declared the province,s independence. Kalat's drive for Baloch independence lasted until March 1948, when the Pakistan Army moved into the province. There was little unrest in the early 1950s, when Balochistan was given the unique status of a \"state union\" within Pakistan, a step below that of a full-fledged province.  3. (U) Modern Baloch nationalism arose between 1955 and 1970, when the disputes between the province and Islamabad over natural resource exploitation by the federal government, lack of representation in the federal bureaucracy and government, inadequate access to jobs and education, and the influx of settlers from other provinces first came to the fore. To offset growing Bengali power in East Pakistan, the GOP abolished all the provinces in West Pakistan in 1955 and created a single province--what was called the \"One Unit.\" In Balochistan, this arrangement was seen as reducing provincial autonomy and reinforcing Punjabi domination.  During the \"One Unit\" era, the GOP began to exploit the natural gas fields at Sui in Dera Bugti district and insurgents christened themselves \"firaris,\" a Baloch name for those whose grievances cannot be satisfied through negotiations.  4. (U) An uprising in 1958 was put down by the military; subsequent insurrections flared throughout the 1960s, ending when the \"One Unit\" was broken up in 1970 and Balochistan became a full province.  5. (C/NF) The most severe Baloch insurrection raged from 1973 to 1977, with an estimated 55,000 tribal militants and 80,000 Pakistani troops fighting in the eastern and central parts of the province. Fighting was triggered by the dismissal of the provincial government in February 1973 and subsequent imposition of central government rule by Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, who sought to consolidate power in the hands of the Pakistan Peoples, Party (PPP). The Marri, Bugti, and Mengal tribes overcame traditional differences to join forces to fight the Bhutto government. During the uprising, as many as 10,000 Baloch fled to Afghanistan for safety. The Army eventually suppressed the uprising, after some 5,000 Baloch fighters and 3,000 government soldiers died in the fighting.  6. (C/NF) In the 1980s and 1990s, militants launched sporadic attacks on government forces and development projects as the Baloch tribes tried to squeeze royalties out of the government and oil and gas companies. The period was also marked by severe intertribal fighting as the unity of the 1970s faded. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14349|06ISLAMABAD16269|06ISLAMABAD16944|06ISLAMABAD16962|06ISLAMABAD16987", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/29/2006 10:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 016994  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (PARA MARKINGS)  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2015 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINR SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN (4): WHO'S WHO - THE BALOCH TRIBES  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14349      B. ISLAMABAD 16269      C. ISLAMABAD 16944      D. ISLAMABAD 16962      E. ISLAMABAD 16987  ISLAMABAD 00016994  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary and Introduction: The Baloch people give their name to Balochistan Province in Pakistan, where roughly two thirds of them live, as well as Sistan-va-Baluchestan Province in Iran. The Baloch are further spread across the southern reaches of Afghanistan. Baloch society is tribal, with power traditionally concentrated in the hands of autocratic princes, known as \"sardars,\" who have near totalitarian control over the lives of their tribes. Baloch nationalist and tribal leaders share a fundamental belief that the federal government has not given the province its fair share of the region's mineral wealth, but many non-sardari nationalists disapprove of the violent tactics employed by some tribal leaders to wring concessions out of the federal government. There seems little support in the province, beyond the Bugti tribe, for the current insurgency. Nationalist leaders admit that calls for Baloch independence are nothing more than political rhetoric, and that they really want a voice in the province,s development and a greater percentage of the revenues generated by the province's natural resources. This cable is the fourth in a series of cables on Balochistan. (Note: This cable was drafted prior to the reported death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti on August 26 (Ref C). End note.) End summary.  ------------------------ Sub-Provincial Cleavages ------------------------  2. (C) The concerns and demands of the people of the Makran Coast, where the seaport of Gwadar is located, differ from those of the tribes of eastern Balochistan, home of the province,s natural gas and coal fields. The coastal region is not dominated by tribal sardars as is the eastern quarter. It is less tribal, better educated, more middle class and politically aware than the rest of province.  3. (C/NF) The eastern portion of Balochistan has been dominated by three sardars (Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti, Nawab Khair Bux Marri, and Sardar Attaullah Mengal. These three sardars, out of more than 60 in the province, have each been alternately in and out of government and in and out of jail; the common denominator between them is their militant opposition to the federal government in Islamabad. The tribal society that these sardars oversee has been described as \"feudal militarism,\" in which the sardars call upon tribal militias to assert their power. The traditional exchange underlying this system is for the sardars to dispense booty or property rights in return for support. This system basically remains intact, but today favors are generally traded for votes. The system, however, has been criticized for enriching the sardars but not their followers. There are around 46 Baloch tribes--he major ones include the Bugti, Marri, Mengal, Bizenjo, Jamali, and Rind--and roughly 70 sardars in Balochistan.  4. (C) Some Baloch nationalists, while sympathetic to the sardars' demands, disapprove of their violence, seeing their brand of nationalism as self-serving and noting that most Baloch people would be satisfied with greater home-rule within Pakistan.  ------------- The Big Three -------------  5. (C/NF) Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti, who was 79 when killed in an  ISLAMABAD 00016994  002.2 OF 003   August 26, 2006 GOP attack on his mountain hiding place (Ref C), had led his tribe since 1946. He has served as provincial governor, provincial chief minister and as a member of the National Assembly as late as 1999. He also led intermittent armed rebellions against the federal government since the 1970s. Favoring expansive provincial autonomy and open to independence, Bugti could also be motivated by cash and is rumored to have been bought off by the government at various points in his career. Nawab Bugti was widely believed to have pocketed the vast majority of royalties from the Sui gas fields on his tribe's territory, rather than spreading the wealth amongst the tribe or investing in development projects in his tribal territory. Often mired in local tribal and honor issues to the detriment of his political goals, he lead the Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP), which has four seats in the provincial assembly, one in the National Assembly, and two in the federal Senate. His militia had an estimated 5,000 fighters in 2004, but has been decimated by Pakistani security forces during recent months of fighting.  6. (C/NF) Nawab Khair Bux Marri, an octogenarian, lives in Karachi and has the reputation of being a leftist and an uncompromising hardliner. Although he publicly demands complete independence for Balochistan, he may also negotiate with the government to avoid being left out on development funds and royalties. According to one Embassy interlocutor, Marri is able to rule his tribe from Karachi because he has built a tribal \"institution\" that does not depend on his presence. Like Bugti, he has fought the government intermittently over the decades. His tribal territory includes the mountainous stretches of Kohlu and Loralai districts, an area thought to have oil reserves, but in which Marri has blocked exploration. He heads the Baloch Haq Tawar party, which only has representation at the district level. His militia is also estimated at roughly 5,000 men, and is usually considered the have the best-trained and most hardcore fighters. Many believe that the elusive Balochistan Liberation Army (BLA) is actually an avatar of Marri's militia.  7. (C/NF) Sardar Attaullah Mengal, age mid 70s, is the most politically active and astute of the three rebel sardars, leading the militarily weaker but more numerous Mengal tribe. He served as Balochistan's Chief Minister in 1971-73. Unlike Nawabs Bugti and Marri, Mengal has sought to broaden his nationalist appeal beyond his tribe. He controls the areas of Khuzdar, Kharan, and parts of Bolan and Sibi. He has provided political support to the current uprising; some evidence indicates that his tribe has supplied guns and funds to Bugti and Marri. His roughly 4,000-strong militia has not joined in the 2005-06 insurgency. He leads the Balochistan National Party-Mengal (BNP-M), which has two seats in the provincial assembly, one in the National Assembly, and one in the federal Senate. His son Akhtar Mengal was Balochistan's chief minister in 1997.  -------------------------- Other Major Baloch Players --------------------------  8. (C) Dr. Abdul Hayee Baloch, president of the National Party, trained as a medical doctor but made his career in politics. Born in Bolan, he entered politics in the Gwadar area. His National Party represents the non-sardari Baloch middle class in urban areas, and the coastal Makran population. He favors the abolition of the sardari system, believing that the sardars are fighting for their own financial benefit and not the province's. He believes increased provincial autonomy is critical for the Balochistan's development and opposes political rights for Settlers, but condemns violence. The National Party has four seats in the provincial assembly and one in the federal Senate.  9. (C) Mohim Khan Baloch is a middle class politician who  ISLAMABAD 00016994  003.2 OF 003   heads the Balochistan National Party-Awami (BNP-A). He favors provincial autonomy but opposes independence. He lost much of his popular credibility when he broke ranks with the other nationalist leaders and joined the Musharraf government in 2002, largely to obtain a Senate seat. His condemnation of GOP actions during the current insurrection cost him his Senate seat earlier this year. The BNP-A's five seats in the provincial assembly are part of the ruling coalition, and the party has one seat in the federal Senate, which it picked up in the election that Mohim Khan Baloch was defeated.  ------- Comment -------  10. (C/NF) Currently, there is little unity among the Baloch nationalists or among the sardars. In the provincial assembly the nationalist and sardar parties hold just ten of 65 seats; the Pakistan Muslim League, which President Musharraf relies on to run the country, has 23 seats in the assembly, and rules in tandem with the religious coalition Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal, which has 17 seats. In the national assembly the nationalist and sardari parties hold a handful of the 342 seats. Fractured by tribal affiliation, geography, political orientation, and personal rivalry, Baloch are unlikely to make common cause against the Government--which explains the Army's emerging strategy of taking on the sardars one by one, while concurrently promising to address the overall grievances of the Baloch tribes. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/29/2006 12:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 017014  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER SUBJECT: REACTION TO DEATH OF NAWAB BUGTI SHIFTS FROM MILITARY TRIUMPH TO MARTYRDOM  REF: ISLAMABAD 16944  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reason 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: From Sunday's \"we've got him\" triumphialism, the government's position on the death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti has evolved to a denial that the Baloch tribal leader was the victim of a targeted assassination.  The back pedaling follows growing criticism of the security operation that resulted in Nawab Bugti's death.  The harshest criticism has come from Baloch politicians; most violent protest to date has been limited to cities in Balochistan (Quetta, Gwadar,and Kalat), although most of the province and much of interior Sindh remains shut down in a \"wheel jam, shutters down\" general strike. Politicans from outside the province have joined the attacks on the government, that the action \"martyred\" a Pakistani patriot working for the restoration of the constitution.  Press commentators have followed this same line, making it difficult to predict how long the wave of bathos and recrimination will wash over the government.  Only three days after Bugti's demise, his death has been transformed from a military victory over an insurgent tribal leader into the killing of a political leader, the specter of which cuts close to the bone of Pakistan's political class. END SUMMARY.  2. (C) The government's triumphant announcement Sunday of the death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti, sardar of Baloshistan's Bugti tribe and leader of an intermittent insurgency against the Government of Pakistan (reftel), quickly yielded to fallback explanations distancing the government from accusations of extra-judicial murder.  Government sources quoted in Tuesday's papers claimed that the Bugti hideout was attacked after a GOP helicopter responded to ground fire; that the collapse of the cave in which the Nawab and his men were hiding was the result of structural weakness; and that the incident was the result of betrayal at the hands of another Baloch tribe, the Marri.  (Note:  For a more expansive take on the government's evolving tale, post recommends the August 29 \"The News\" article entitled \"Bugti's killing in Marri area intriguing,\" by Muhammad Saleh Zaafir, a journalist thought to be close to the military at www.thenews.com.pk.  End note.) The government has stopped short of pleading ignorance that Nawab Bugti was hiding in the cave attacked by GOP forces on August 26.  Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, announcing the dispatch of earth-moving equipment to recover the bodies still buried in the cave, said the government did not know if the Nawab's grandsons (and possible heirs) were also killed in the attack.  3. (SBU) The new spin on Nawab Bugti's death was driven largely by reactions from Pakistan's political class.  All opposition parties condemned the action, staging an ad hoc \"mourning session\" in the National Assembly to pay tribute to the \"martyr\" who died in an \"extra-judicial murder.\" Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy (ARD) Chairman (and Pakistan People's Party leader) Amin Fahim characterized the Nawab as a supporter of parlimentary democracy and called the incident \"murder of democracy.\"  Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) leaders condemned the government for \"killing politicians after declaring them traitors\" and promised the issue would be addressed at an All Parties Conference convened by the ARD on August 31.  Both PML-N and the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) bench, consisting of an alliance of six religious parties, have declared that they may tender their resignations from the Assembly to protest the death of the Nawab.  The MMA has threatened to play the mass resignation card before, but only \"at an opportune time.\"  4. (SBU) Some in the governing coalition have distanced themselves from the incident.  The Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) characterized the death as an \"extrajudicial killing.\" MQM member of the Assembly Syed Haider Abbaz Rizvi said the party opposed the use of state force in Balochistan \"from day one.\"  MQM leader-in-exile Altaf Hussain condemned the incident as well, while Farooq Sattar, convener of the party, explained that the incident would not prevent the party from supporting the government over the opposition.  ISLAMABAD 00017014  002 OF 002    5.  (SBU) Politicians of all stripes are distraught by the scenario of one of their own -- a former provincial chief minister and national minister and parliamentarian -- dying at the hands of the military, even if the deceased led or encouraged insurrections in his home province over the past 50 years.  Some in the Pakistan People's Party have gone so far as to likening Nawab Bugti's death to that of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto at the hands of the Zia government in 1979.  Even government ministers have public expressed their regret for the circumstances surrounding Bugti's death.  6. (C)  Comment:  The evolving hagiography in some press accounts portray Nawab Bugti as one of the last bulwarks against the Talibanization of the border region.  Like many Baloch, the Nawab had no tolerance for militant Islamists, but he also relished his status as a tribal lord answerable only to himself.  Efforts to recast the Nawab as a standard bearer for democracy are little more than revisionist portraiture, as anecdotes depicting his penchant for flaunting his powers and prowess abound.  Even in death, Nawab Bugti continues to bedevil the government in Islamabad:  post's contacts say that opposition parties debating the no confidence motion against PM Shaukat Aziz in the National Assembly today are brushing over the corruption charges that were to be the crux of their case, instead devoting their floor time to excoriating the government for resorting to violence to subdue amn iconic political rebel.  End comment.  7.  (U)  Consulate staff in Lahore and Karachi contributed to this cable.  BODDE BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/30/2006 13:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017255  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/30/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER SUBJECT: DEATH OF NAWAB BUGTI CONTINUES TO ROIL THE STREETS, POLITICAL ARENA  REF: A. (A) ISLAMABAD 16944       B. (B) ISLAMABAD 17014  Classified By: CHARGE D'AFFAIRES PETER W. BODDE, REASON 1.4 (B) AND (D)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Protests over the government's killing of Baloch leader Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti continued into the third day, August 29.  Demonstrations, road blockages, riots and even several bombings appear to have been in reaction to the Nawab's death.  The apparent inability of the government to produce the body -- or those of the Nawab's relatives who might have died with him, gave the popular demonstrations impetus, while politicians became increasingly concerned over the death of one of their own, even one in open revolt against the central and provincial government.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) Street protests over the death of Nawab Bugti continue across his home province of Balochistan.  On Tuesday, rioting broke out following a memorial service held in the provincial capital Quetta.  About 10,000 people attended the service and shots and stone throwing erupted after prayers.  Stores and two banks were looted and then torched.  Reports of grenade throwing and attacks on government buildings across the town continued until police and Frontier Corps elements were able to restore calm.  Three bombs exploded in Quetta and Mastung and a bomb in the coastal city of Hub ripped through a hotel, killing perhaps five and wounding nearly a dozen.  Riots and looting were also reported in Khuzdar, Turbat and Gwadar.  In contrast, a similar memorial service in Karachi was a non-event, with 150-200  present at the Pakistan Press Club and no violence or demonstrations associated with the ceremony.  The press reported that sporatic violence and police activity occurred on Tuesday in interior Sindh, but the bulk of the action appears to have been in Balochistan.  Consulates in Lahore and Karachi reported no significant actvities on Wednesday.  3. (C) The government continues to refine its story of Bugti's death.  On Tuesday, Major General Shaukat Sultan, Director General, Inter-Services Public Relations, explained to the press that Bugti was not, as reported, traced through his cell phone, but rather that army forces entered the cave after a surveillance helicopter was fired upon from the ground.  He said that army officers entered the cave to speak with Bugti once they realized he was inside.  As soon as the officers entered the cave there was a huge explosion and the cave collapsed, killing, among others, the army officers. Sultan added that the cave was very unstable and that retreiving the bodies by hand would take another three to five days.  4. (C) The political classes have criticized the government's handling of Bugti's death.  Even elements of the ruling coalition have expressed opposition and sorrow over the way the Nawab's case was closed (ref B).  Senator Mian Raza Rabbani, leader of the opposition and the Deputy Secretary of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) told PolOff there was a trans-party apprehension over what the death might imply for Pakistani politicians who might oppose any particular government.  4. (C) COMMENT: The government appears to have been caught somewhat off guard by the strong reaction in Balochistan and among the political class to Bugti's death.  Their desire to downplay the situation is indicated, in part, by their not making much of the funerals of the officers who died in the incident.  Those who die in action are usually honored as national heroes.  END COMMENT.  5. (U) Consulates Karachi and Lahore contributed to this report. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17014", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/30/2006 13:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017256  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/30/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: NO CONFIDENCE VOTE ON PM AZIZ FAILS  REF: ISLAMABAD 17014  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde,  Reason 1.4 (b) and (d ).  1.  (C)  Summary:  The government easily defeated an August 29 no-confidence vote against Prime Minster Shaukat Aziz. Opposition leaders admitted they tabled the motion knowing it could not pass, but said the vote was intended to stake out a position against the government as an opening move in the campaign for late 2007 elections. End summary.  2. (SBU) On August 29, the National Assembly rejected a no confidence vote against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz.  The opposition's 17-page charge sheet (and 500 pages of self-described \"evidence\") accused the PM of corruption or incompetence in many of the government's decisions of the past two years.  The measure received only 136 votes of the 172 required.  Since the opposition fell short, there was no need for government supporters to cast their votes.  3.  (SBU) The case had been brought before the Assembly on August 23, but the August 27th death of Baloch tribal leader Nawab Bugti, not the specifics of the original motion, ultimately dominated the debate preceding the no confidence vote, not the specifics of the original motion (Septel).  4. (C) In separate conversations with Poloff the evening of the 29th, Senator Mian Raza Rabbani, the Senate's leader of the opposition and Deputy Secretary of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP),and Ashen Iqbal, Central Information Secretary of the Nawaz Sharif faction of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML-N), argued that the no confidence measure -- tabled in the certainty that it would not pass -- was a necessary action to stake out a position against the Musharraf government.  Ashen Iqbal added that the no confidence vote was an opening move in the campaign for the late 2007 elections. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17014", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/30/2006 13:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017257  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/30/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: NO CONFIDENCE VOTE ON PM AZIZ FAILS  REF: ISLAMABAD 17014  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde,  Reason 1.4 (b) and (d ).  1.  (C)  Summary:  The government easily defeated an August 29 no-confidence vote against Prime Minster Shaukat Aziz. Opposition leaders admitted they tabled the motion knowing it could not pass, but said the vote was intended to stake out a position against the government as an opening move in the campaign for late 2007 elections. End summary.  2. (SBU) On August 29, the National Assembly rejected a no confidence vote against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz.  The opposition's 17-page charge sheet (and 500 pages of self-described \"evidence\") accused the PM of corruption or incompetence in many of the government's decisions of the past two years.  The measure received only 136 votes of the 172 required.  Since the opposition fell short, there was no need for government supporters to cast their votes.  3.  (SBU) The case had been brought before the Assembly on August 23, but the August 27th death of Baloch tribal leader Nawab Bugti, not the specifics of the original motion, ultimately dominated the debate preceding the no confidence vote, not the specifics of the original motion (Septel).  4. (C) In separate conversations with Poloff the evening of the 29th, Senator Mian Raza Rabbani, the Senate's leader of the opposition and Deputy Secretary of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP),and Ashen Iqbal, Central Information Secretary of the Nawaz Sharif faction of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML-N), argued that the no confidence measure -- tabled in the certainty that it would not pass -- was a necessary action to stake out a position against the Musharraf government.  Ashen Iqbal added that the no confidence vote was an opening move in the campaign for the late 2007 elections. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE109356", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/30/2006 13:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017261  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2016 TAGS: KAWC, PHUM, PINR, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP RESPONSE ON DETAINEE REPATRIATION AND READ-OUT OF GTMO VISIT  REF: A. STATE 109356       B. ISLAMABAD 14210      C. PORGES-SACK EMAIL - 28 AUG 2006  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C/NF)  On August 25, PolCouns met LTC Imran Farooq, MoI/National Crisis Management Cell Operations, to solicit his assessment of his visit to the detention facilities at Guantanamo (GTMO).  LTC Imran said that interviews with the Pakistani detainees went well.  The Pakistani delegation left with the impression that most of the Pakistani detainees are individuals who were \"in the wrong place at the wrong time,\" not extremists who pose a serious threat.  LTC Imran said that the Pakistani delegation provided an out-brief to \"the four intelligence agencies\" at GTMO before departing.  2.  (C/NF) Imran said that the delegation discussed repatriation of the detainees with these intelligence agencies and the force commander at GTMO; the delegation left with the impression that no major obstacles remain to the repatriation of six of the Pakistani detainees. This includes Saifullah Paracha, provided that the GOP makes arrangements to keep him in detention here in Pakistan.  LTC Imran said that GTMO officials told the delegation that if the Government of Pakistan (GOP) submits a formal request for repatriation, it will be favorably received. Upon his return to Islamabad, LTC Imran prepared a report for the MFA in support of a formal request for repatriation.  In addition to six of the GTMO detainees, Imran said that the GOP would be requesting the release of 20 Pakistani nationals currently in Bagram.  3.  (C/NF)  PolCouns advised LTC Imran that the Embassy had yet to receive a response from the GOP regarding the USG request for written assurances regarding access, etc. (Ref A, B), for detainees released to Pakistani custody; that it would be important for the US to receive this before any new request for expedited repatriation.  (Note:  Following this meeting with LTC Imran, Embassy received the requested written assurances from the MFA on August 29; see para. 7, below. Post will fax/email a copy of the MFA note to SCA. End note.)  4.  (C/NF)  Imran warned that for the GOP to keep Saifullah Paracha in custody, it would need information/evidence from the USG to justify his continued detention, noting that Paracha's family has a petition protesting his detention pending in the Pakistan Supreme Court.  Without some evidence to support a longer detention, LTC Imran said, Pakistani law would only permit his detention for three months. (Note: Post will pursue the question of the GOP's ability to hold detainees in custody with the MFA and other interlocutors. End note.)  5.  (C/NF)  LTC Imran concluded by requesting that PolCouns poll USG colleagues in Washington for agencies' views on prompt repatriation of the Pakistani detainees.  PolCouns agreed to solicit interagency position, but warned that it would be difficult to share these views frankly when the GOP continues to leak stories proclaiming the detainees  imminent release to the local press.  Stressing that the USG wants to work with the GOP to resolve the GTMO cases, PolCouns noted that this is a sensitive process that must take place quietly, not in the newspapers, so as not to create inflated expectations.  6.  (C/NF)  Comment:  Post appreciates word that DOD is prepared to move forward crisply with the repatriation of certain Pakistani detainees (Ref C) and looks forward to working with OSD, S/WCI and SCA on facilitating this process.  Post requests guidance from Department on next steps, including interagency coordination and coordination with the GOP of any press statements preceding or following the repatriation.  7.  (C/NF)  Text of diplomatic note received August 29, 2006 responding to Embassy's note verbale of July 24, 2006 (Ref A):  (Begin text.)  No USA-2/16/06  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad and has the honour to  acknowledge receipt of the Embassy's note dated July 24, 2006, which reads as follows:  (text of Embassy's July 24 note verbale)  The Ministry confirms that the Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan shares the understanding reflected in the Embassy's note and hereby provides the assurances requested regarding access.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its highest consideration.  August 24, 2006  (addressed to) Embassy of the United States of America, Islamabad.  (End text.) BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14349|06ISLAMABAD16269|06ISLAMABAD16944|06ISLAMABAD16962|06ISLAMABAD16987|06ISLAMABAD16994", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/4/2006 7:23", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017546  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/03/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINR SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN (5): THE PASHTUNS -- BALOCHISTAN'S OTHER TRIBES  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14349      B. ISLAMABAD 16269      C. ISLAMABAD 16944      D. ISLAMABAD 16962      E. ISLAMABAD 16987      F. ISLAMABAD 16994  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary/Introduction: In Balochistan, violent Baloch tribal leaders and vociferous Baloch nationalists grab the headlines, while the Pashtuns interests and issues are buried on the inside pages.  Like the Baloch, the Pashtuns share deep-seated anger toward the federal government for Islamabad's exploitation of the province's natural resources without commensurate investment in the province's development or economy, particularly in Pashtun districts. Some Pashtuns accuse the Baloch nationalists of chauvinism in their calls for greater provincial autonomy, equating greater provincial control to greater Baloch control. Balochistan is also now home to thousands of Afghan refugees, the majority of whom are Pashtun, and is also a reputed safe haven for Taliban leaders directing operations in southern Afghanistan. Despite the province's large Pashtun population, it has thus far resisted the spread of \"Talibanization\" that has plagued the northern Pashtun belt.  End summary/introduction.  ( Note: This cable was researched before the August 26 death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti. (Ref C) End note.)   --------------------- Who are the Pashtuns? -------------------  2. (U) Pashtuns comprise roughly 38 percent of the provincial population, slightly less than the 43 percent of the population that is ethnically Baloch. (Note: NGO representatives in Quetta say that rumors in the province contend that the Pashtuns have actually surpassed the Baloch as the most numerous ethnic group in the province. End note.) The Pashtuns dominate the northern quarter of the province, considered by many the least-developed are of the least-developed province in Pakistan. The Pashtun areas of Balochistan are the southernmost stretch of the Pashtun belt that runs from the Hindu Kush in the north, straddles the Pakistan-Afghan border, and ends in the south in the Balochistan districts of Quetta, Sibi, and Loralai.  3. (C) Pashtuns communities are present in nine of Balochistan's 27 districts. There is also a narrow Pashtun corridor  in the predominately Baloch Chaghai district that stretches westward along Balochistan's border with the Afghan provinces of Qandahar, Helmand, and Nimruz. In recent months, these Afghan provinces have experienced a violent resurgence by the Taliban, with some attacks launched from locations in Balochistan.  According to Embassy interlocutors, Afghan refugee camps in these areas, such as Girdi Jungal, Pir Alizai and Posti, are prime havens for drug smugglers and gun runners.  --------------------------- Pashtun Political Alignment ---------------------------  4. (U) Balochistan's Pashtuns are politically divided among three different parties:  -- The secular Awami National Party (ANP), whose home base is the North West Frontier Province (NWFP), where it holds ten seats in the provincial assembly; the party has no seats in the Balochistan assembly and has only one seat in the federal Senate;   ISLAMABAD 00017546  002 OF 004   -- The Pashtoonkhwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP), which has five seats in the provincial assembly, one seat in the National Assembly, and two in the federal Senate; and  -- The Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, Fazlur Rehman Faction (JUI-F), a key member of the national coalition of Islamic political parties -- the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA). The JUI-F holds 17 seats in the 65-member provincial assembly, where it is part of the governing coalition, and holds roughly half of the MMA's seats in the National Assembly, where Maulana Fazlur Rehman leads the opposition.  --------------------- Pashtun versus Baloch -------------------  5. (SBU) While the Pashtun share many of the same concerns as the Baloch (septel)--they feel that the federal government has taken advantage of the province's natural resources without adequately funding development, and worry about settlers from Punjab and Sindh tipping the province's demographic balance -- they do not support the Baloch agenda in its entirety.  Pashtun political leaders from both the ruling PML and the opposition PKMAP describe the Baloch nationalists as presenting themselves as the only people of Balochistan. Pashtun leaders accuse Baloch nationalists of treating the jobs reserved in the federal bureaucracy for Balochistan as being intended strictly for ethnic Baloch, not the Pashtuns.  6.  (C)  Some Pashtun leaders nurture their own separatist aspirations.  For example, Senator Mahmood Khan Achakzai (PKMAP) said that while the Pashtuns agree that Islamabad should give more power to the provinces, describing the central government as the \"Punjabi empire,\" the best way to empower the Pashtuns was to create a \"natural Pashtun homeland\" made up of the NWFP, the tribal agencies and the Pashtun districts of northern Balochistan and the northwestern edge of Punjab. (Note: There is little prospect of this concept gaining traction, given the current political realities of Pakistan. End note.)  ------------------------------------- Skepticism about the Bugti Insurgency -------------------------------------  7. (C) Pashtuns are generally not supportive of the current Baloch tribal uprising led by tribal sardars Bugti, Marri and Mengal (ref C), or to the rebel's attacks on infrastructure in the province's Sui gas fields. The Pashtuns sympathize with Nawab Bugti's fight to stop the GOP's efforts to build army cantonments in the province, the permanent military bases that Islamabad sees as key to protecting development projects. Many in Balochistan -- Baloch and  Pashtun -- view these as Islamabad's effort to exert greater control over the province. Achakzai said, wryly observing that \"Punjabis are good fish: they swim from cantonment to cantonment.\"  8. (C) Pashtuns are deeply skeptical about the motives of the Baloch tribal leaders, pointing out that two of the Baloch sardars currently at odds with the government -- Nawab Bugti and Sardar Mengal -- have formerly served as chief ministers or provincial governors.  Many Pashtun recall that Nawab Bugti was allied with the government more often than against it. Pashtun leaders view the Baloch tribal sardars as placing more importance on sustaining tribal law -- and their unassailable positions as the heads of their tribes -- than fighting for the general welfare of the province.  ------------------- The Afghan Refugees -------------------  9. (C) The Afghan Pashtuns are a source of frustration for  ISLAMABAD 00017546  003 OF 004   both the Baloch and the native Pashtuns of Balochistan. Afghan refugee camps are considered havens for gun runners and drug smugglers, as well as possible hiding places for the Taliban from Afghanistan.  As of December 2005, there were 683,000 Afghan refugees in the province, according to UNHCR. NGO workers and Quetta-based journalists say that the number of Afghans is actually substantially higher, as many cycle in and out of Balochistan, depending on the conditions on the Afghanistan side of the border.  10. (C)  In separate August meetings with NGO workers -- including a Pashtun native of Balochistan and one of Afghan Hazara descent -- and with journalists, poloff heard descriptions of near-universal resentment in Balochistan, especially in and around Quetta, against the Afghans. In some areas, local residents blame the Afghan Pashtuns for exacerbating the drought that has afflicted the province since the mid 1990s. They are accused of deforesting large stretches of land. Palwasha Jalalzai, a Pashtun from Qila Saifullah who works for the NGO SEHER, told Poloff that many Balochistan Pashtuns \"completely resent\" the Afghans. Balochistan natives also resent the refugees and Afghan economic migrants for obtaining Pakistani national ID cards and passports, and thus being treated just like Pakistanis. An Afghan refugee recently earned top grades in the town of Dalbandin and took the one spot reserved for a Dalbandin student at Balochistan's only medical school. \"That one medical college seat could have gone to a local Dalbandin boy, who already is so disadvantaged,\" Palwasha lamented.  13. (C) The Afghans have created new neighborhoods that run from the edge of Quetta to the feet of the mountains that rise over the city. Pashtuns have built the extensive town of Pashtunabad, a lawless place that even the police and security forces refuse to enter, according to journalists and local interlocutors. In contrast, many of the estimated 300,000 Afghan Hazaras in Quetta, Shia Dari speakers from central Afghanistan, live in the neighborhood known as Marriabad. It is an area of neat, tidy, modern-looking, shop-lined streets. The Uzbeks, another non-Pashtun group, are the poorest of the Afghan refugees, working as the day-laborers and living in mud-walled compounds in a low lying area of the city squeezed between the railroad line, Balochistan University and Pashtunabad.  ----------- The Taliban -----------  14. (S) Afghan Taliban leaders -- virtually all ethnic Pashtun -- are widely suspected of hiding in the Pashtun areas of Balochistan, including Quetta, according to the local contacts and journalists. In July 2006, the GOP initiated what it termed concerted effort to expel Taliban members from the country, beginning with raids and arrests in and around Quetta on July 16 - 18, in which more than 200 Afghans were rounded up. More arrests occurred in August, including 28 suspected Taliban members at a hospital in Quetta.  Senator Sarwar Kaker (PML) was skeptical that these arrests -- and the subsequent expulsion of 58 Afghans arrested who lacked immigration documentation but who were not considered Taliban -- would have much effect given the porous nature of the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. Like many of post's interlocutors, he expected the 58 to drift back into Pakistan because there is more work on this side of the frontier.  Quetta-based journalists told poloff that the arrests were \"a joke\" because the police had arrested ordinary Afghans, not high-level Taliban.  In contrast, Syed Salman Muhammad, the top ranking officer in the city police department, asserted to poloff that all the Afghans the police rounded up were Taliban, explaining that police policy now was to focus on Afghans without valid immigration or refugee documents through raids in places where single Afghan men were known to live. The police were not/not harassing  ISLAMABAD 00017546  004 OF 004   Afghan families with valid refugee status, he said.  ------- Comment -------  16. (S) Comment: From a brief visit to Quetta and extensive outreach to Balochistan contacts in Islamabad, post concludes that there has been minimal spillover in Balochistan of the \"Talibanization\" phenomena present in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), despite allegations of the Taliban's heavy presence in Quetta and along the Afghanistan border.  While Baloch-dominated districts may be naturally immune to the ethnic-Pashtun Taliban, even Pashtun-dominated districts appeared to be only minimally influenced by Taliban ideology.  End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14349|06ISLAMABAD16269|06ISLAMABAD16944|06ISLAMABAD16962|06ISLAMABAD16987|06ISLAMABAD16994|06ISLAMABAD17546", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/4/2006 7:31", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017547  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/03/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINR SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN (6): THE NATIONALIST INSURGENCY  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14349      B. ISLAMABAD 16269      C. ISLAMABAD 16944      D. ISLAMABAD 16962      E. ISLAMABAD 16987      F. ISLAMABAD 16994      G. IIR 6 873 0346 06      H. IIR 6 873 0344 06      I. ISLAMABAD 17546  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary/Introduction: Despite widespread disillusionment with Islamabad, the most recent tribal uprising led by Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti is a localized insurrection, in which the Nawab had rhetorical support from Baloch nationalists, but little concrete backing in the province-at-large. The Government of Pakistan (GOP) responded with a hard line, eschewing negotiations and using the Army and Frontier Corps (FC) to physically isolate Bugti and his fighters. Tribal militants relied on sabotage, especially of gas pipelines, and ambush to attack GOP forces and development projects. While many Baloch -- and Pashtuns in the province -- are sympathetic to Nawab Bugti's cause, support is tempered by the belief that he fought for personal gain, rather than the province's welfare, and that his tactics of destroying economic infrastructure hurt the people of the province as much as the government. This cable on the insurgency is the sixth in a series on the current political situation in Balochistan. End summary/introduction. (Note: This cable was researched before the death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti on August 26, 2006. (Ref C) End note.)  2. (C) The latest Baloch tribal insurrection erupted in early 2005, as Nawab Bugti, leader of the Bugti tribe, used the rape of a female doctor at the Sui gas facility as a pretext to attack the government in and around his home district of Dera Bugti. The government responded with force, significantly enlarging the Frontier Corps (FC) and Army presence in the area. A cease-fire was reached and largely implemented by April 2005, but tribal attacks on gas pipelines, electricity pylons, train lines, and other infrastructure continued. The fighting picked up in December 2005, when Marri tribesmen were linked to the December 14 rocket attack on President Musharraf as he visited an FC base in Kohlu, the proposed site of an Army cantonment in the heart of Marri territory.  ----------- The Tactics -----------  3. (S) The paramilitary FC has spearheaded this latest crackdown, backed by military air power and army artillery. The security forces first moved to secure the gas fields at Sui and Loti in Bugti territory. Subsequently, they took control of coal fields to the northwest. Most fighting has been confined to the ethnically Baloch districts of eastern Balochistan, in particular Dera Bugti and the adjacent Kohlu district. The tribal militants rely on hit-and-run tactics against \"soft targets,\" especially unguarded stretches of gas pipeline.  According to DAO-Islamabad, the militants do not have the firepower for a head-on confrontation with the security forces. (Note:  That said, the insurgents can use their limited arsenals quite effectively, as illustrated by the December 2005 attack on a helicopter carrying FC Commander Major General Dar, wounding him in both legs. End note.)  While many attacks on economic installations have been blamed on the \"Balochistan Liberation Army,\" a nom-de-guerre associated with Nawab Marri, fighting in recent months seems to have been conducted exclusively by Nawab Bugti's fighters.  4. (S) The GOP response to the insurgency has been overseen  ISLAMABAD 00017547  002 OF 004   by the Director General of Military Intelligence, Nadeem Ijaz, a Musharraf protg Supported by other high-ranking military leadership, he eschewed calls for negotiations with Nawab Bugti. The government tactics were to initially attack the militant hideouts or strongholds with helicopter gunships and/or fighter-jets, and then to follow up with ground forces.  According to DAO-Islamabad, the military has been reluctant to engage the militants at night, despite being equipped with and trained in the use of night-vision devices and night operations using helicopters.  5. (C) The Army and FC have moved steadily, if slowly, from road to road, ridge to ridge, to hem in Bugti's forces. The scarcity of water in the province slowed operations, but the sustained advance drove many Bugti fighters to surrender. Throughout the summer, Bugti \"commanders\" with two or three dozen men and their weaponry surrendered to the government on a regular basis. Some Embassy contacts have been skeptical about the reported surrenders by Bugti's warriors:  an ethnic-Pashtun interlocutor told poloff that the reported surrenders were \"all propaganda,\" reminding him of the \"false stories\" about Bengali militants surrendering to GOP forces in East Pakistan in the years immediately before Bangladesh's independence. The August edition of the newsmagazine \"The Herald\" asserted that the government has provided cash payments and renovated homes to entice militants into surrendering.   6. (S) The government now controls roads and key districts, through a combination of troop deployments and the reintroduction of cooperative tribes, many of whom were driven out of the area by Nawab Bugti during past insurgencies  prompted by GOP moves to tap the region's natural resources. For example, the Kalpar Bugtis are one of at least four tribes moving back into the region with GOP assistance. Originally, the dominant Bugti sub-tribe in Sui, the Kalpars took advantage of the economic benefits the gas fields provided. When they began to assert themselves in the 1980s and early 1990s, they ran afoul of Nawab Bugti, who drove thousands of Kalpars off the land. Now the government is using the Kalpars and other tribes to back fill the towns in which they have taken control.  7. (U) On August 24 (two day's before Nawab Bugti's death in an assault by GOP security forces), government-allied Bugti sub-tribes held what was described as a \"first-ever\" tribal jirga in Dera Bugti.  Thousands of tribesmen attended the jirga, at which they declared the end to the Nawabi system and pledged their support to the government, according to press reports.  Traditionalists have rejected the jirga's declaration: the hereditary Khan of Kalat asserted that the jirga's declarations would have no impact on tribal traditions and that the tribal system was becoming stronger with the passage of time, not weaker.  ----------------------- Development as a Weapon -----------------------  8. (C) The DGMI has told DAO that an important element in marginalizing the militants is the construction of infrastructure in the province, including roads. The FC has plans to build school in the Balochistan. The military is pressing forward with the construction of cantonments at Dera Bugti, Kohlu, Sui, and Gwadar. These cantonments are a major source of antagonism between the Baloch tribes and Islamabad, as they provide a base for the GOP to assert authority in the province. Akhtar Mengal, a former chief minister in the late 1990s and son of nationalist leader Sardar Attaullah Mengal, said that \"the cantonments are there to crush Baloch nationalists.\"  9. (S) The GOP sought to isolate Nawab Bugti and the other sardars politically, even as it waged a ground-and-air war  ISLAMABAD 00017547  003 OF 004   against the insurgents. The DGMI provided DAO with a gruesome pictorial report titled \"Terror in Balochistan,\" documenting those killed and injured -- including young children -- by insurgent attacks, as well as sabotage to infrastructure such as gas pipelines, electricity pylons, and train tracks. President Musharraf has publicly accused Nawab Bugti and the two other sardars selfishly opposing provincial development that would benefit Balochistan and the nation. In his July 20 televised speech to the nation, Musharraf indulged in an extended tirade against Nawab Bugti, signaling his disgust by saying that he would no longer accord Bugti the title of Nawab (prince).  Musharraf vowed that Baloch militants would not derail development, saying, the GOP must \"establish the writ of the government and end the writ of the sardars...security is paramount to our development schemes.\"  ---------------------------------- Alliance with Taliban or al-Qaeda? ----------------------------------  10. (C) Embassy contacts were nearly unanimous in stating that Nawab Bugti and the other Baloch sardars would not form an alliance with either the Taliban or al-Qaeda. Poloff was repeatedly told that the Baloch are secular and liberal, including the sardars. \"Our national interests clash with the mullahs,\" said Dr. Hayee Baloch, a non-tribal nationalist leader from the Makran Coast. \"We are 100 percent against the mullahs.\" This antipathy stems, in part, from the perception among the Baloch that the ulema either are supporters of Pashtun interests or are backers of Islamabad's interests. Even Sarwar Kaker, a moderate Pashtun PML Senator, acknowledged that the GOP has used the mullahs over the years to undercut Baloch nationalist political parties...a tactic the Baloch will not forget.  ----------------------------- The Baloch Weapons' Suppliers -----------------------------  11. (S) The Baloch militias appear to be buying their weapons from smugglers from Afghanistan, according to Embassy contacts. These weapons are being run into the country by hard-core criminal gangs, said Director General of the National Police Bureau Muhammad Shoaib Suddle, who served three tours with the police in the province. \"They are not doing it for tribal affinity; they are doing it for money.\" The DGMI says it is easy to get weapons from narcotics traffickers in the region. The GOP worries that Afghanistan and India, the latter through its consulates in Afghanistan and Iran, are providing funding and lethal aid to the Baloch insurgents. (Note: Embassy has no evidence that India is providing support to the Baloch insurgency through its consulates in Afghanistan and Iran. End note.) Indian financial assistance to the Baloch nationalists, if it exists, could also be funneled through Baloch expatriates in the Persian Gulf states who remit funds to the province.  ------------------------------------- Support for Nawab Bugti -- How Broad? -------------------------------------  12. (C) While many in the province understood Nawab Bugti's battle against the central government, not all supported  his methods. Some embassy contacts noted that, in an underdeveloped province, the militants were destroying what little economic infrastructure existed. Journalists in Quetta told poloff in August that common people believe that Nawab Bugti exploited national grievances for his own purposes, hindering development to maintain his control over his tribe. A contact in the National Police Bureau described Bugti as fighting by himself, with the support of only a few Marris; the Mengals had already distanced themselves from him.  13. (C) Senator Mahmood Khan Achakzai of Balochistan of the Pashtoonkhwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP), thinks that Nawab  ISLAMABAD 00017547  004 OF 004   Bugti miscalculated in challenging the government, saying that the Bugtis were not prepared for a sustained fight. Given the Nawab's history of switching to the government's side, Achakzai believes that the Nawab expected a minor show of force would lead to more government concessions. (Note: In 2005, the Pakistani military's top spokesman said the government paid Nawab Bugti millions of rupees annually, as well as fringe benefits, because of the gas fields in Bugti tribal territory. End note.)  ------- Comment -------  14. (C) Comment:  Only a few weeks before his death, Embassy interlocutors portrayed Nawab Bugti as a revered nationalist leader, but one on the verge of passing from the political scene.  Even Baloch nationalist leaders, while praising Bugti's leadership over the decades, had little positive to say in early August about his last battle against the government.  While some in Balochistan believe the GOP intentionally picked a fight with Bugti, all understood that Islamabad intended to subdue him first, before turning to the Marri and Mengal tribes, in order to ensure that federal development projects and foreign investment could move ahead. End comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD14349|06ISLAMABAD16269|06ISLAMABAD16944|06ISLAMABAD16962|06ISLAMABAD16987|06ISLAMABAD16994|06ISLAMABAD17546|06ISLAMABAD17547", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/4/2006 7:38", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 017548  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/03/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, PTER, PINR SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN (7): FINDING A SOLUTION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14349      B. ISLAMABAD 16269      C. ISLAMABAD 16944      D. ISLAMABAD 16962      E. ISLAMABAD 16987      F. ISLAMABAD 16994      G. IIR 6 873 0120 96      H. IIR 6 873 0140 93      I. IIR 6 873 0104 93      J. IIR 6 873 0142 92      K. ISLAMABAD 17546      L. ISLAMABAD 17547  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary: To bring peace to the restive province of Balochistan, Islamabad must overcome pervasive distrust and skepticism toward the central government and its proposed development projects by ensuring the people of the province -- Baloch and Pashtun alike -- are the first and main beneficiaries of development. To accomplish this, Islamabad must improve education in the province so that the youth of Balochistan will be able to eventually take advantage of the employment opportunities development offers. Long-term government financial schemes that would help soothe provincial hostility toward Islamabad remain bogged down in inter-provincial rivalries. End summary.  (Note: This cable, the last in post's Balochistan Primer series, was researched before the death of Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti on August 26 (Ref C). End note.)  2. (U) Quetta journalists and NGO representatives in August were adamant that the dispute between Balochistan and Islamabad goes beyond the three big tribal sardars (leaders), citing widespread alienation in Balochistan -- among both Baloch and Pashtuns. Palwasha Jalalzai, a Pashtun working for the NGO SEHER, said that youngsters across the province are \"really angry...they have had a long history of having nothing.\" The main issue is the lack of job opportunities, which stems, in part, from the poor educational institutions in the province. Despite some grumbling that \"it is better to live in the stone age than to stay in Pakistan,\" Jalazai said that youth support for the Baloch and Pashtun nationalist movements is not enthusiastic. Balochistan's population already sees jobs in the government's development projects (e.g., the Gwadar port expansion), going to outsiders, leading to fears that a flood of new (and better qualified) Punjabi and Sindhi job-seekers are ready will pour into Balochistan.  --------------------------- Parliament Tries to Appease ---------------------------  3. (C) Many Baloch and Pashtun nationalists see increased autonomy and control over natural resources as the only means to get a fair deal from Islamabad, because \"so far, no federal government has ever satisfied the Baloch people,\" Senator Shahid Hassan Bugti, Jahmhoori Watan Party. He noted that \"East Pakistan became Bangladesh because of suppression, not because of autonomy.\"  After the Bugti insurgency erupted in early 2005, a parliamentary committee was formed to resolve the dispute. The committee's November 2005 report recommended steps to (a) increase economic opportunity in Balochistan, (b) invest in social infrastructure, (c) limit settler influence in elections, and (d) increase provincial autonomy and control over gas revenues. Dr. Hayee Baloch, Balochistan National Movement, told poloff that the parliamentary committee recommendations were \"not serious,\" as illustrated by the GOP's minimal implementation effort.  --------------------------------- A Bigger Slice of the Federal Pie ---------------------------------  ISLAMABAD 00017548  002 OF 003    4. (C) A central issue between the federal government and the smaller provinces has been the distribution of federal funds based solely on provincial population. In its final recommendations, the parliamentary committee on Balochistan stated that \"level of development and degree of backwardness should be foremost among the criteria\" for distributing federal funding.  Since 2002, Islamabad has proposed amending the distribution formula to take in other factors, such as provincial backwardness/poverty. So far, the four provinces have not agreed on a formula: while Balochistan and the NWFP have excepted a multiple-factor formula that included \"backwardness/poverty,\" the dominant Punjab province wanted population to be the sole criterion; Sindh, in a unique twist, sought to include revenue collection as part of the equation, because so much of the GOP's revenues are generated in Karachi. Despite the backing of PML President Chaudhry Shujaat, a Punjabi, for including \"backwardness/poverty\" in the mix, the distribution formula has yet to be modified.  -------------------------------- No Negotiations with Nawab Bugti --------------------------------  5. (S) In contrast to Islamabad's efforts to broker a new finance deal with the provinces, the GOP was unwilling to negotiate with Nawab Bugti, both the linchpin of armed Baloch opposition to the GOP but also a leader who had been bought off by previous governments. Both President Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz have said that the government will not allow sardars like the late Nawab Bugti to hinder development or stop the government's effort to extend its writ over Balochistan.  9. (C) Many Embassy contacts noted the advanced ages of the three rebel sardars, arguing that Islamabad could wait for them to die of natural causes, while whittling down tribal power so their successors inherit weakened fighting forces. The GOP could simultaneously exploit the anger among the common people of Balochistan over the insurgents destruction of provincial infrastructure.  When the militants blow up electric pylons or gas pipelines, people in Balochistan suffer along with people in Punjab. The sardars have often been derided by those outside their tribes for failing to develop the province when they held political power. Rahila Durrani, PML, asserted that Nawab Bugti and Sardar Attaullah \"did nothing when they had the chance.\"  --------------------- No Baloch in the Army ---------------------  10. (C) In a country in which the Army is an avenue to social advancement and power, Baloch are chronically under represented in its ranks. Many potential Baloch recruits do not meet the military's minimum education requirements. Others countered that Baloch do not join because they do not want to become \"servants of Punjab.\" According to DAO reporting (reftels), the Pakistan Army has tried since the early 1990s to redress its ethnic imbalance, but had difficulty recruiting Baloch with at least an eighth grade education (a lower standard than applied to other recruits).  ----------------------- Talibanization Doubtful -----------------------  11. (C) Poloff's interlocutors were nearly unanimous in doubting that \"Talibanization\" could take root in Balochistan. The most vulnerable demographic, as in other parts of the Muslim world, is the province's alienated, unemployed youth, who might be attracted to the appeal of religious extremism.  Even so, post's interlocutors believe that there is a limit to religious political influence in the province, noting that the JUI has been a major political  ISLAMABAD 00017548  003 OF 003   party in the province since the early 1970s, but today holds only a quarter of the seats in the provincial assembly.  ------- Comment -------  12. (C) To ease provincial tension and implement its development plans smoothly, Islamabad must overcome decades of mistrust.  Baloch mistrust of Islamabad runs very, very deep:  contacts in Quetta told poloff to expect very little celebrating on August 14 -- Pakistan's Independence Day -- because the Baloch view the date as \"the day that all our troubles started.\" Almost all opposition political leaders related stories of how Punjabis or Sindhis were given preference in government hiring in Balochistan, and of the government using \"the agencies\" -- shorthand for intelligence services such as Military Intelligence and Inter-Services Intelligence -- to pressure them.  To overcome Baloch skepticism, the government must bolster the province's education system, so that local people can compete for the jobs. GOP leaders are already proceeding along this path, separating recalcitrant sardars from the general population by promising education, development and employment. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/5/2006 12:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 017594  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER, PINR SUBJECT: BUGTI INTERRED, FAMILY IGNORED, BALOCHISTAN QUIET BUT SEETHING  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 16944       B. ISLAMABAD 17044      C. ISLAMABAD 17255      D. ISLAMABAD 17547  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reason: 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (U) Protests over the August 26 death of Bugti tribal leader Nawab Bugti (refs A,B, and C) continued over the weekend.  On August 31, the government announced that it had retrieved Bugti's remains from the cave in which he was killed. Its decision to bury the body rather than to return the remains to the family resulted in additional calls for demonstrations on September 3 and 6.  The September 3 demonstrations were limited almost exclusively to Balochistan.  2. (U)  On September 1, the Dera Bugti District Coordination Officer and a few members of the newly-formed anti-Nawab Bugti jirga (Ref D) buried Nawab Bugti,s remains in the family plot, but without the blessing or participation of the Bugti family.  The family, which had demanded to be given custody of the remains, wanted to hold the funeral in Balochistan's capital Quetta, center of the protest over his death.  Pakistan Muslim League (PML) leaders Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and Mushahid Hussein were quoted in many papers as regretting that they had failed to ensure that the remains were respectfully returned to the Bugti family.  3. (C)  Calls by opposition parties and Baloch nationalists for a nationwide \"shutter strike\" on September 1 received a mixed response, with greater participation in Balochistan and Sindh than in the rest of Pakistan.  A heavy security presence in major cities ensured that most demonstrations were peaceful; on balance, the strike failed to whip up public passions as the opposition has hoped.  One member of Jamaat Islami's (JI) youth wing Shabbab-e-Milli lamented to post that the GOP had sidestepped the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal,s (MMA) trap by not/not ordering mass arrests of MMA and other protest leaders.  Another contact opined that the nationwide strike call was a waste of time, saying that in areas outside of Balochistan, \"those who came out were the usual Jumna (Friday prayer) crowd which is always available to the mullahs.\"  On September 3, anti-government protests  were limited to Balochistan, with approximately 5,000 demonstrators in Quetta and 5,000 others across the province.  4. (U)  Following the September 3 demonstrations ended, six violent incidents occurred, including a grenade attack in Quetta; an attack upon a natural gas pipeline near Mastung; an improvised explosive device near a government office in Gwadar and a rocket fired at a Frontier Corps post in Khudzar.  The grenade attack resulted in six injuries. Organizers had requested no violence during the demonstrations.  ------------------- POLITICAL SHAKE-UP? -------------------  5. (SBU) In Quetta, the Balochistan National Party (BNP) announced it had resigned its seats in the Senate, National Assembly, Balochistan Assembly and district assemblies.  The party said it would no longer participate in elections or support the current government.  (NOTE: The BNP currently holds one Senate, one National Assembly and two provincial assembly seats. END NOTE)  Other Baloch parties were discussing whether to follow the BNP's lead.  The MMA, which holds 28 of the 65 seats in the Balochistan Assembly, will decide whether to resign its seats on September 5; most observers believe the MMA will opt to remain at the table. The two members of the BNP-Mengal faction quit the  ISLAMABAD 00017594  002 OF 002   Balochistan Assembly, but their sole senator is not expected to resign from the National Assembly.  ----------------------- THE GOVERNMENT RESPONDS -----------------------  6.  (SBU) In an effort to reverse the anti-government media spin, Minister of Information Ali Durrani described Bugti, Khair Baksh Marri and Ataulla Mengal (other prominent and rebellious Baloch tribal sardars) as having \"an outlook of terrorists.\"  Durrani detailed a long charge sheet containing a range of crimes reportedly committed by all three leaders. Separately, Balochistan Governor Owais Ghani described the arsenal the government reportedly recovered  in Bugti,s cave hideaway as including multi-barrel rocket launchers, 75 mm recoilless rifles, 82 mm mortars and surface-to-air missiles, all from the former Soviet Union, and channeled through Afghanistan and possibly India, according the Governor.  ------- COMMENT -------  7.  (C) GOP and military officials did themselves no favors by failing to reach an accommodation with Bugti,s survivors to return the Nawab,s remains for a family burial.  Instead, the GOP,s insensitivity to the family's wishes and tribal traditions has prolonged anti-government criticism and spawned a new generation of conspiracy theories.  Some media questioned the military's ability to quickly recover its soldiers' remains while requiring  four additional days to recover the body of the Nawab.  Others suggested that photos of the Nawab's undamaged watch and eyeglasses -- prominently displayed by government officials as proof of his death ) actually suggested that that he was not killed by the cave,s collapse, but was  shot at close range or killed in a gas attack.  Even if the accusations against Bugti and the rebel sardars in Information Minister Durrani,s &charge sheet8 are on the mark, there is little chance of them sticking in the current media climate.  END COMMENT.  8.  (U) Consulate Karachi contributed to this report. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD13677|06ISLAMABAD14209|06ISLAMABAD15543", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/6/2006 14:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 017766  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: MARR, MOPS, PGOV, PINR, PK, PTER SUBJECT: NORTH WAZIRISTAN PEACE ACCORD ANNOUNCED  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 14209      B. ISLAMABAD 13677      C. ISLAMABAD 15543  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:   On September 5, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) and local tribal leaders announced that the 45-member Grand Jirga for North Waziristan Agency (NWA) had a peace agreement with the GOP.   (Note:  Consulate Peshawar has obtained a copy of the agreement and has translated the Urdu text, which post will forward to SCA/PB.  End note.) The compromise is characterized by concrete measures to ensure the compliance of tribal militants with GOP red-lines and government acknowledgment of tribal customs and privileges.  NWA tribes pledged to live peacefully, to cease cross-border military infiltration into Afghanistan and  to respect the GOP's political administration.  In return, the government will cease on-going military operations; it has already released 150-some prisoners and begun to vacate check-posts previously manned by Pakistani military.  2.  (SBU)  The agreement reached between the government and the jirga, which had begun deliberations on July 20 and had twice extended a cease-fire with tribal militants (Ref A, B), applies only to NWA.  The document's heading declares that it is a \"peace agreement between the Political Agent of NWA (serving as representative of the Governor of North West Frontier Province and the GOP), the tribal elders of NWA, local \"Mujahidin,\" students and religious scholars of the Utmanzai tribe.\"  Key provisions of the agreement include the following provisions:  - The Utmanzai tribes agrees:  -- Not to attack law enforcement agencies and/or government property, or to target GOP officials, security officials or pro-government tribal elders or journalists; -- To refrain from forming a parallel administration; tribal members will respect the (GOP) political administration and will resolve disputes according to the Frontier Crime Regulations (FCR) and local traditions, in consultation with tribal elders and students of Utmanzai; -- Not to allow cross-border movement for the purposes of military operations in Afghanistan.  (Note:  Cross-border movement will be permitted for trade and family visits.  End note.); -- No infiltration into areas adjacent to NWA (e.g., the Frontier Regions or settled areas of NWFP); and -- Foreigners in NWA will leave the area; those who are unable to leave must live peacefully and obey the laws of the land, including the provisions of this agreement.  - The GOP agrees to:  -- Release all arrested militants, who will not be subject to arrest for past incidents; -- Restore all tribal perks and privileges; -- Dismantle all new check posts; old check posts will be staffed by tribal Khassadar forces.  (Note:  The Khassadars are a loosely-organized security force, answerable to the Political Agent, often used to guard government facilities. End note.) -- Return all seized weaponry and vehicles; -- Cease military operations in the region and resolve disputes according to local custom; -- Pay compensation for losses to life and property damaged in government security operations; -- Not restrict tribesmen from keeping weapons consistent with tribal customs.  3.  (U)  The agreement provides for the formation of a 10-member committee comprising tribal elders who will be tasked to:  -- Maintain open lines of communication between the GOP and  ISLAMABAD 00017766  002 OF 003   tribes; -- Insure implementation of the agreement; -- Serve as a point-of-contact in emergencies, to prevent crises from developing; -- Act against those who do not abide by the agreement.  4.  (C)  According to press reports, the GOP implementation of its commitment in the agreement is already well underway. The government has released most militant detainees.  Local press reports that the army has already evacuated check-points on the Bannu-Miranshah, Miranshah-Ghulam Khan, Miranshah-Razmak, and Miransha-Dattakhel roads, as well as posts in southwest NWA in the Shawal Valley near the Afghanistan border and along the border between NWA and South Waziristan.  The GOP has also released seized assets and is preparing to pay compensation to tribal members who suffered personal or property damage during security operations -- even if the property involved was being used by the militants against GOP forces.  5.  (C)  Some provisions in the agreement clearly bear the mark of compromise.  For example, going into the negotiations, the government said it would demand the expulsion of all foreigners in NWA (Ref C).   The GOP later walked this demand back to requiring all foreigners to register.  In the end, the issue of foreigners in NWA is now essentially left to the NWA tribes, who are now guarantors that the foreigners do not participate in unlawful or subversive activity.   Tribal members are permitted to retain their weapons according to their customs, but cultural norms treat RPGs as \"small arms.\"  An interesting side note is that the agreement is between the government and \"Utmanzi tribe,\" rather than the tribes of NWA.  Although the vast majority of Wazir tribesmen in NWA belong to the Utmanzai tribe, non-Wazir tribes also live in NWA.  For example, Maulana Sadiq Noor and Maulana Abdul Khaliq, two NWA militant religious leaders, are not Wazirs; they belong to the Daur tribe.  6.   (C)  Comment:  While welcoming the jirga agreement as a first step toward ending the violence that has plagued NWA over the past year, many observers are skeptical that the NWA jirga agreement will effectively reduce cross-border attacks on Coalition and Afghan forces or halt the spread of Islamism in the long term.  Post's NWA contacts noted that anti-coalition militants have changed their tactics in the past; the agreement to stop cross-border infiltration into Afghanistan from NWA may simply shift the locus of militant operations to other FATA regions.  Other commentators observed that the militants walked away from the jirga pocketing all of their demands.  Others suggested that the jirga agreement would be viewed as victory by the militants' supporters, enhancing their ability to spread their Islamic ideology.  In contrast, although the GOP achieved key aims: an end to attacks on government officials and sympathizers, cessation of cross-border and inter-FATA activity), it was forced to compromise on others.  7.  (C)  Comment (cont):   The fact that the GOP elected to negotiate with the tribal militants can alternatively be interpreted as either a telling sign of how weak the government's position in NWA had become or a mark of Governor Orakzai and the federal government's determination to restore sufficient stability in the agency to allow the GOP to proceed with its long-term strategy of political reform, economic investment and social development for NWA and the rest of the FATA.  As noted in earlier reporting (Ref C), this jirga was not convened as the tool to fix the GOP's FATA problem -- it was convened to resolve discrete, immediate issues to allow the government and NWA sufficient space to restore law-and- order and create an environment conducive to further negotiation.   Similarly, the well-documented process leading to this agreement places the GOP in a good position if it is forced to resume military operations in the future. Judged against this standard, the GOP might well congratulate itself on a successful outscome.  In coming days, post will  ISLAMABAD 00017766  003 OF 003   poll the GOP's FATA team to gauge its assessment of the jirga agreement.  End comment.      BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/7/2006 2:26", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 017768  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPT FOR P, EUR, NEA, PM, IO  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, MOPS, UN, MARR SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 9 F-16 SIGNING DOUBTFUL  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.    (C)  Summary:  GOP sources told Office of Defense Representatives Pakistan (ODRP) September 6 that the scheduled September 9 signing of the F-16 LOA would not happen.  The same day, MODP (Ministry of Defense Production) sent ODRP a memo requiring an unspecified per-plane price cut; significant (USD 800-900) off-sets; better financing terms via the USG; and changes in the payment schedule.  MG Helmly met with senior PAF and MOD officials September 5. He impressed upon his interlocutors the importance of meeting the September 15 signing deadline.  End Summary  2.  (C)  On September 5, post learned that the planned September 9 signing of the LOA for Pakistan's purchase of eighteen F-16s was in peril.  MG Helmly, ODRP, promptly met with Air Chief Marshall Tanvir, who told him that the PAF still wanted to go forward with the F-16 purchase but that \"the ball was in MODP's (MOD Purchase's) court.\"  Tanvir noted it was increasingly unlikely the LOA would be signed by the contracted September 15 offer expiration date. On September 6,MODP verbally informed ODRP that the ceremony would not occur on September 9th.  It also sent a written request for an extension of the September 15 offer expiration date to December 31 2006.  3.  (C) In its September 6 written request to ODRP, MODP requested unspecified per-plane price reductions.  It also asked for offsets from Lockheed Martin equaling USD 800-900 million - 30 percent of the value of the program.  During his September 5 meetings, MG Helmly had noted that the contract had been negotiated at a very low per-plane cost. LM had not planned for major off-sets or financing challenges.  He also reminded interlocutors that MOD/P had been represented at the contract negotiations with LM.  4.  (C)  MODP also requested improved terms of financing and changes in payment schedules. The PAF separately told ODRP it would seek \"assurances\" on matters such as delivery schedules and security requirements.  5.  (C)  MG Helmly stressed that timing was crucial. If the GOP did not sign the LOA by September 15, the USAF could not complete contract negotiations with LM by 30 November, which in turn would force LM to shut down F-16 production due to lack of orders.  At the very least, the GOP would then face a USD 39 million increase in contract price.  6.  (C)  Interlocutors told MG Helmly that President Musharraf had promised the Finance Ministry to raise the F-16 issue with President Bush during their upcoming bilateral.  ODRP notes that MODP is aware that  the USG cannot fund off-sets, as they involve an agreement between the vendor and the GOP to which the USG is not a party.  A Lockheed Martin VP arrived in Islamabad September 6 to meet with GOP officials.  7.  (C)  Comment:  The GOP's recent experiences with procurement deadlines might lead them to believe that all deadlines are flexible.  We have repeatedly explained that missing the September 15 offer expiration date (OED) will result in significant added costs for the GOP -- costs which the USG is unable to cover. We believe that the Ministry of Defense Production has not understood the limitations of Lockheed Martin's price flexibility nor the constraints on the USG's ability to influence the final price or offset any additional costs caused by the GOP's indecision. ODRP is meeting with MODP on September 7 to reinforce the importance of the September 15 date.  ISLAMABAD 00017768  002 OF 002      BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16944|06ISLAMABAD17014", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/7/2006 13:33", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS E F T O ISLAMABAD 017875  SIPDIS  NOFORN SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/07/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, KTER SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN CLOSED BUT QUIET IN FOLLOW-ON PROTEST; POLITICAL ARENA STILL AGITATED  REF: A) ISLAMABAD 16944 B) ISLAMABAD 17014 C)       ISLAMABAD 17255 D) ISLAMABAD 17594  1. (U) On September 6, Balochistan was again shut down by a general \"wheel jam and shutter down\" strike to protest the death and burial of Nawab Bugti at the hands of the government (reftels).  As with the September 1 and 3 strikes, the province-wide shutdown was generally peaceful and extended into interior Sindh province as well. Most roads in Balochistan were closed, as was the Makran coastal highway between Gwadar and Karachi and the border crossing into Afghanistan at Chaman (near Quetta).  2. (U) The Pakistan Oppressed Nations Movement (PONM) and the Alliance for Restoration of Democracy (ARD) had joined with other opposition parties in calling for the strike and continued protests against government actions in the province.  To underline this point, Rauf Mengal, the lone member of the Baloch National Party (BNP-Mengal)in the National Assembly, resigned. In his resignation speech he said the death of Bugti \"has increased the sense of deprivation among the people of Balochistan and I am convinced that there is no reason left to continue as a member of the House.\"  Mengal's resignation was procedurally correct and in all likelihood final.  As he sat with the opposition, the resignation will have no effect on the government's majority in the Assembly.  3.  (SBU) Sanaullah Baloch Zehri, the sole federal senator from BNP-Mengal, is currently living in semi-exile in England. (NOTE: Where he fled amid rumors that he was about to be arrested by federal agencies.  END NOTE)  Also in protest, and in apparent support of his party leader, Sanaullah faxed his resignation.  In an unorthodox move, he sent it to Mengal rather than to Senate Chairman Soomro, as required by Senate procedures.  This approach may well void his attempted \"resignation.\"  Other members of the opposition are unlikely to play the resignation card, despite well-publicized posturing.  4. (U) Consulate Karachi contributed to the drafting of this cable. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/8/2006 9:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017890  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/23/2016 TAGS: PK SUBJECT: JULY 27-29 COALITION SUPPORT FUNDS DISCUSSIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (SBU) Summary.  From July 27-29 CENTCOM J-8 led a team of OSD-Comptroller, OSD-Policy, CENTCOM, Joint Staff and Embassy personnel to discuss Coalition Support Fund (CSF) issues with the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) Joint Staff, military services, and Ministry of Finance.   The U.S. delegation raised issues regarding formalizing the CSF process, maintaining detailed accounting of expenditures by the GOP, and improving the claims processing time.  The GOP counterparts were attentive to USG needs and ensured greater effort in providing information for CSF reimbursement.  End Summary.  Meeting with Joint Staff ------------------------- 2. (SBU) On June 27 the U.S. delegation met with Brigadier Afzal (Joint Staff, Director Operations and Plans) at the Pakistan Joint Staff Headquarters to discuss CSF funds. Brigadier Afzal's delegation included representatives from each service as well as the incoming and outgoing Pakistani Senior National Representative at CENTCOM.  Brigadier Afzal welcomed the U.S delegation and emphasized that he understood that we had come to improve the procedures for reimbursing the CSF claims.  He reminded the delegation that an earlier team had come in 2004 and as a response, Pakistan had implemented a new spreadsheet that provides more information. The Pakistan military had readily complied with that request and is ready to provide whatever Qormation the USG needs.  3. (SBU) The delegation responded by emphasizing the continual need to formalize the CSF prQs.  In 2001, the USG had to implement the program quickly, but now, five years later, there is a  need to formalize the process as well as look at the future.  The delegation emphasized that the purpose of these discussions was not to cut funding but to improve accountability of the program.  The delegation emphasized the need to provide additional information to Congress, especially in the current tight budget environment.  By having more information, DoD representatives will be better advocates for Pakistan in discussions with Congress.  Presentation ------------ 4. (SBU) OSD-C Senior Analyst stressed the importance of Pakistan's commitment to the Global War on Terror and CSF funding.  The OSD-C Senior Analyst made a presentation to Pakistani officials on the mechanics of the CSF program.  The following were the highlights of the presentation: - Since October 2001, the USG has provided over $4.5 billion in CSF to Pakistan.  Pakistan receives approximately 87% of all CSF money. - CSF is not in the regular budget but is part of the Emergency Supplemental budget.  The authority for CSF was passed after 2001.  It is very unusual for DoD to receive such an authority, so there is a need to protect it and continually defend it. - All CSF claims must be \"valid and reasonable.\" - Claims must be for incremental costs above normal operations.  The delegation emphasized that to understand what is incremental, the delegation needed help understanding what the normal costs are for the Pakistani military. - There must be quantifiable data that is comparable to U.S. costs. - The delegation emphasized that it expected to get CSF in the future but needed to increase its justification of the program in order to ensure funding. - The U.S. delegation passed on a new spreadsheet to the Pakistan delegation that asked for additional information on costs, rates, and operations conducted.  Additionally, the delegation asked the Pakistan military to provide a briefing every 90 days to the Embassy so both sides can talk about the issues and claims. - The delegation emphasized that the requirements it was asking Pakistan for are the same ones that it asks from its own Services.  Discussion of Claims -------------------- 5. (U) The U.S. and Pakistan delegations discussed the April, May, and June claims in order to better understand each line item.  6. (C/REL PAK) The Pakistani military noted that the manpower in the tribal area had increased from 82,000 personnel to 92,000 personnel from April to June.  This is largely due to support provided to MOUNTAIN THRUST.  7. (SBU) There were questions on the Frontier Corp's presence in the tribal area.  These were not fully addressed because there was no Ministry of Interior representative present. The delegation asked if the GOP could break down the number of 11th Corp and 12th Corp Civil Armed Forces in future claims.  8. (SBU) The U.S. delegation emphasized the importance of understanding Pakistan's military operations that claim CSF. Greater clarity and transparency of operations is required to process CSF clams.  The delegation asked for information from the Pakistan military on: -  The number of helo hours broken down by helo type; -  More information about \"road building,\" which is being claimed by both the Pakistani Army and Navy; -  Information about fuel rates and quantities; -  Types of ammunition being used; -  Breakout of flying costs from the Pakistan Air Force; -  More information about the Air Defense Radar; and -  Generally greater transparency and accountability in Pakistani operations that claim CSF.  9. (SBU) The U.S. delegation emphasized to Brigadier Afzal that it would be helpful for the Pakistanis to assist us with predicting future CSF expenses.  Since CSF is a limited pot of money, we need to be able to forecast what is going to happen in the future to ensure funding.  Meeting at the Ministry of Finance ---------------------------------- 10. (SBU) On June 28 the U.S. delegation met with a delegation from the Ministry of Finance to discuss the CSF payment process.  OSD Comptroller presented a briefing on the CSF program and process (the same briefing that was presented at the Joint Staff).  11. (SBU) Ministry of Finance personnel asked if the USG could expedite the processing of claims, as there were many negative consequences of not getting paid back in a timely fashion (such as having to borrow money from the Central Bank to pay the OEF bills).  12. (SBU) The Pakistani Ministry of Finance asked if the USG could improve claim processing time to two/three months. After some discussion, the delegation agreed to try to process claims in a three/four month time frame.  OSD-C also agreed to try to process the Pakistan January/February claim by the end of August and the March-June claim by the end of November 2006.  13. (SBU) Both sides agreed to continue to meet in the future and have meetings that included Ministries of Defense, Finance, and Interior.  (NOTE: The Embassy attempted to do this prior to this trip but received push back from the Pakistani Joint Staff.)  Office Call with MG Bilal of the Joint Staff -------------------------------------------- 14. (U) On June 29 the delegation held an Office Call with Major General Bilal, the Joint Staff's Director General of Operations and Plans, and again explained that as money gets tighter, the USG will need more information to justify CSF.  15. (SBU) MG Bilal stated that he had heard that the discussions went extremely well and that his staff would provide any additional information that we need.  He knew there was an issue with money being used for road construction and he promised that he would get more information to us.  16. (SBU) The delegation emphasized that in addition to gaining more information to validate CSF, Congress would also want to eventually see the results of these operations.  The delegation stated that the USG would need to see tangible progress in the long-term.  17. (U) This cable was drafted in cooperation with Cara Negrette, OSD-Policy. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE145242", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/8/2006 11:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017908  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2016 TAGS: PREL, UNGA, PTER, PHUM, CU, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON NAM SUMMIT DELIVERED  REF: STATE 145242  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reason: 1.4 (B) and (D)  1. (C) Summary: On September 5, poloff delivered reftel demarche to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (UN-I) Director Haider Shah.  Poloff and Shah discussed the issues that might be discussed during the NAM summit in Havana: the UN Security Council race between Guatemala and Venezuela, an international definition of terrorism, and the recent crisis in the Middle East.  End summary.  UN Security Council: Guatemala vs. Venezuela -------------------------------------------- 2. (C) Shah reiterated the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) position to support Guatemala in its bid for a UNSC seat.  He added that it would be unlikely that the UN Security Council race would be discussed during the summit.  Typically, most of the horse-trading occurs in New York in the weeks preceding the vote.  Terrorism --------- 3. (C) Turning to the NAM final document on terrorism, Shah thoroughly explained the GOP's position on equating national liberation movements with terrorism.  Shah said that Pakistan is strongly against terrorism, fights terrorism, and is a victim of terrorism. However, the GOP recognizes the right of people to struggle for liberation and does not equate exercising that right with terrorism.   The Middle East and democracy in Cuba ------------------------------------- 4. (C) Shah said that he had read some of the draft language on the Middle East that is being circulated for the NAM's final document and it strongly opposes Israel's recent actions in Lebanon.  He said that it did include references to \"Israeli crimes,\" but he did not recall the exact language.  Singapore is the only country to object to the current draft.  Shah said that the GOP would most likely join the consensus view on the subject (i.e. vote to support the current draft).  Finally, Shah did not engage with poloff on the importance of supporting democracy in Cuba. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06KABUL4029", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/8/2006 12:32", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 017916  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, AF, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR EMBASSY KABUL  REF: KABUL 4029  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Ambassador Neumann and the rest of the Embassy Kabul country team from September 12, 2006 to September 13, 2006. The purpose of the visit is consultations with Embassy Islamabad.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Political Officer, Mohammed Motiwala.  He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Fax: 92-51-208-2537; Cell: 0300-501-2202.  3.  Accommodations for Ambassador Neumann and his aide have been arranged at the EMR.  The remaining members of the delegation will stay at the Capital Grand Guest House.  The guest house contact number is: 92 51 282-2881.  4.  The control officer and driver will meet visitors upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad.  Transportation will be provided to the airport on the day of departure.  5.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  6. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows \"Work at the U.S. Embassy\" or \"Official Business\" as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  7.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  8.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006.  A grenade attack against the Pr otestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002.  American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  All DOD military and civilian personnel on TDY, TAD, or PCS orders to Pakistan are required to notify the Force Protection Detachment (FPD), US Embassy, Pakistan of their travel plan/itinerary.  Notifications must be made well in advance prior to arrival in country, principally if FPD support is needed.  Upon arrival into country, DOD personnel are required to check in with the FPD to receive a current threat briefing, as well as to be reminded of applicable force protection countermeasures.  Failure to comply with this requirement may result in either denial of current or future country clearances.  FPD e-mail addresses are as follows:  FPDPakistan@state.sgov.gov and FPDPakistan@state.gov 9.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French engineers.  As well, an October 2004 bombing in the lobby of the Islamabad Marriott injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the back, away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on their floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  10.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-520-4200 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-526-8800  11.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver's License is not valid in Pakistan.  12. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than 'good samaritan' care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State's Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC's contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/8/2006 13:39", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 017963  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPT FOR P, EUR, NEA, PM, IO  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, MOPS, UN, MARR, LE SUBJECT: NORTHERN WAZIRISTAN UPDATE:  SEPTEMBER 8  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  Summary:   While the September 5 agreement between the GOP and North Waziri leaders allows foreigners to remain in the North Waziristan Agency so long as they do not engage in attacks on or in Afghanistan, some foreigners reportedly are leaving NWA for neighboring areas, a development that perhaps supports Pakistani military claims that Waziri tribal leaders are serious about enforcing the agreement's restrictions on militant activities.  Pakistan Army told Office of Defense Relations Pakistan on September 7 that it would not decrease troop levels in North Waziristan Agency (NWA), but instead would redeploy them to forward bases and border posts where they could fight infiltration. End Summary.  --------------------------------------- Foreigners in North Waziristan ---------------------------------------  2.  (S)  (Note:  The Embassy's unofficial translation of the Sep. 5 agreement between Northern Waziri leaders and the GOP is contained in paragraph 10.  End Note.) The final text of the agreement between North Waziri leaders and the GOP confirms that foreigners in North Waziristan Agency (NWA) will not be forced to leave nor  be forced to register with the government.  The agreement specifies that only those foreigners with signficant ties (\"for whom leaving would be a hardship\") should remain in North Waziristan Agency.  The document does not detail who will arbirtrate \"hardship.\"  Waziri tribal leaders promise that those foreigners who remain will \"live in peace, respecting the laws in force and agreement.\"  A Consulate Peshawar contact claims that four of the 12 signatories on the Waziri side were foreigners.  3.  (S)    On September 7, Pakistan Army GHQ Director General -- Military Operations MG Pasha told the Office of Defense Relations Pakistan (ODRP) that tribal leaders were committed and motivated to enforce the agreement's restrictions on foreigners. MG Pasha said that the Pakistan Army would continue to target enemy fighters -- especially foreign fighters -- and that any in North Waziristan Agencywho did not abide by the peace agreement would be hunted down as enemies.  On September 7, the Pakistani military reported some movement of foreign fighters from NWA to Khyber, Kurram and Orakzai Agencies, where the militants' actions would not be covered by the September 5 agreement.  On September 8, Sailab Mehsud, President of the Tribal Union of Journalists, told political FSN that he had seen numerous Uzbek Taliban leaving North Waziristan Agency to resettle in South Waziristan, also not covered by the agreement.  --------------------------------- Operation Mountain Fury ---------------------------------  4.  (S)  General Pasha told ODRP  emphatically that the NWA agreement would not affect Pakistani Military support to OPERATION Mountain Fury.  He said that the GOP intended to fulfill all of its commitments.  --------------------------------------------- ---------- Locals Worry of \"Talibanization\" of NWA --------------------------------------------- ----------  5.  (C)  Several Northern Waziri businessmen told post on September 8 that Taliban who had not been seen for months were \"appearing everywhere.\"   These contacts feared that, without GOP troops present, North Waziristan could become increasingly \"Talibanized.\"  (Note: In the peace agreement, North Waziri leaders specifically commit that \"No parallel administration shall be established.  The writ and authority shall be of the Government of Pakistan only.\"  That said, the businessmen with whom post spoke were  ISLAMABAD 00017963  002 OF 004   not yet convinced that local tribal and political administration leaders would be able to enforce this requirement vis-a-vis the Taliban.  End note.)  --------------------------- GOP Implementation ---------------------------  6.  (C)  On September 8, post contacts reported that GOP forces were dismantling \"new\" checkpoints and returning older ones to Waziri officials, as required by the agreement.  The contacts added that GOP troops had not departed from NWA, but had relocated to colonial-era forts and camps.  MG Pasha confirmed to ODRP that Pakistani troops were remaining in NWA but were being repositioned to forward bases, garrisons, and border posts. MG Pasha stressed  that the agreement would not affect the Pakistani military's level of vigilence and that most of the newly-closed checkpoints were in the interior of NWA, not along the border.  Indeed, the GOP viewed the agreement  as an opportunity to fill gaps in their presence in remote border areas believed to be used as infiltration routes. An XI Corps officer in Peshawar told ODRP there that closing interior check points allowed the military to build a reserve that could serve as a rapid reaction force near the border.  The officer added that the Pakistan Army would not remove any posts west of Miran Shah or Razmak.  7.  (C)  Post contacts reported that the government had begun paying compensation to families and madrassas whose homes and facilities were damaged or destroyed during hostilities.  8.  (SBU)  Late in the day September 8, the press reported that the governor of NWFP, who had orchestrated the Loya Jirga that led to the NWA agreement, was hoping to call a Jirga with the same goals for South Waziristan Agency.  ----------------------------------- ABC Story Aftermath ----------------------------  9.  (SBU)  The headline of the September 6 ABC News story on the North Waziristan Agency agreement (\"Osama gets safe haven in Northern Waziristan\") was not/not a direct quote from ISPR MG Sultan.   Sultan told post that, during his interview with ABC, he had explained that the agreement allowed law-abiding foreigners to remain in NWA.  He stressed that his comments in no way concerned Bin Laden. The print version of the ABC story supported Sultan's explanation.  Sultan issued a press release late Sept 6 that underscored that the GOP would continue to target Osama and Al Qaeda leaders.  The MOD issued an equally strong press release. (Note:  Post has forwarded the statements, as well as the MFA's press release,  to SCA/PB. End Note.)  Sultan gave several press interviews September 7 in which he stated that GOP officials regretted the concern caused by the ABC report.   ------------------------- Text of Agreement ------------------------  10.  (SBU)  GOP representatives and representatives of Waziri tribes, Taliban students, and foreigners signed the following agreement on September 5.  While there is still no official translation, we believe this one, produced by Embassy staff, to be fairly accurate.  (Begin Text)  PEACE AGREEMENT North Waziristan Agency  ISLAMABAD 00017963  003 OF 004    Party One:  Political Agent of North Waziristan Agency as a representative of Governor NWFP, Federal Government   Party Two:  Tribal elders of North Waziristan Agency, local Mujaheddin, students and ulema of Utmanzai tribes   The following agreement is a decision of the competent jirga.  The parties had entrusted the authority to the jirga according to the tribal traditions.  The following decision was announced based on the same authority (Wak). By virtue of this agreement the parties shall be bound to abide by the following conditions:  Students, Ulema of Utmanzai Tribes  The second party, i.e., tribal elders of North Waziristan Agency, local Mujaheddin, students, and ulema of Utmanzai tribes shall make sure that:  1.    The law enforcement agencies/forces and government property shall not be attacked and there shall be no targetted killings of any sort.  2.    No parallel administration shall be established. The writ and authority shall be of the government of Pakistan only.  Political administration shall be contacted for the resolution to administrative problems and the administration shall resolve all problems with the support of Utmanzai tribes according to traditions and in accordance with the FCR.  3.    Cross-border movement into neighboring Afghanistan shall not be allowed for the purpose of military operations.  However, movement shall be allowed for trade and business, and meeting with relations according to the traditions and law.  4.    There shall neither be infiltration into districts adjacent to North Waziristan Agency nor shall a parallel administration be established.  5.    All foreigners in North Waziristan Agency shall leave the area.  Those who shall not be able to leave due to some compulsion (literally for whom leaving would cause hardship) shall live in peace, respecting the laws in force and the agreement.  Morever,the above conditions shall apply to them.  6.    All the government property in the shape of vehicles, arms, wireless sets etc. that has fallen into the hand of Party Two during the conflict shall be returned to the government.  Government  1.    All people arrested during the (military) operation shall be released and shall not be re-arrested on the basis of past incidents.  2.    The government shall restore all tribal privileges.  3.    The government shall dismantle all new check posts and the old ones, as in the past, shall be manned by 'Khasadars' or 'Levies'.  4.    The government shall return the seized vehicles and other equipment such as weaponry etc.  5.    After the agreement the government shall stop aerial and ground (military) operation and resolve issues in keeping with the local customs.  6.    The government shall offer compensation t  ISLAMABAD 00017963  004 OF 004   o the heirs of those innocent people who have lost their lives and property during (military) operation.  7.    There neither is restriction on (small) arms in accordance with tribal traditions nor shall there be (any restriction) by the government, but restriction on large arms shall remain.  8.    The agreement shall come into effect upon the withdrawal of troops from check-posts to camps.   Miscellaneous  1.    According to this agreement, a ten-member committee shall be formed after mutual consultation.  This committee shall consist of ulema, tribal elders and members of the political administration.  This committee shall be tasked to perform the ollowing functions:  a.    Keep a constant contact between the tribes of Utmanzai and the government. b.    Review and ensure the implementation of the agreement.  2.  If any person or group (local or non-local) shall not abide by the peace agreement and shall try to breach peace in (North) Waziristan, action shall be taken against him (or them)  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17768", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/11/2006 11:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 017992  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  FOR SCA, PM, H  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, MASS SUBJECT: EMBASSY RECOMMENDATION ON ENGAGING GOP ON F-16 SALE  REF: ISLAMABAD 017768  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker. Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  Post requests senior officials from SCA, PM, H, and OSD convene Pakistani Ambassador Durrani and reinforce the importance of the September 15 Offer Expiration Date (OED) for signing the F-16 Letter of Acceptance(LOA.) End Summary  2.  (C)  Over the weekend, Ambassador Crocker engaged President Musharraf's Chief of Staff, LTG Hamid Javaid, on the F-16 purchase agreement.  (Note:  The GOP had scheduled the LOA signing for September 9 but then last week canceled the ceremony and issued a set of new demands, detailed reftel.)  The Ambassador stressed that the Offer Expiration Date was September 15 and that the GOP must understand there was no flexibility with that deadline.  It was too late to be presenting new demands; missing the September 15 date would create potentially serious ramifications for the entire F-16 package agreement.  3.  (C)  Post believes it would be beneficial for senior officals from SCA, PM, H, and OSD to convene Ambassador Durrani and reiterate the points Ambassador Crocker made over the weekend.  Following are those points:  --  It is too late to try to renegotiate the Letter of Acceptance.  September 15 is a hard deadline.  (Note:  While we have heard the Defense Secrutiy Cooperation Agency might be able to extend the date to September 30, we most certainly are not/not mentioning that to GOP officials.  End Note.)  --  Missing the deadline could have serious ramifications, both on this F-16 sale and on future defense purchases.  --  Lockheed Martin has offered you the best price possible. The offer of that price expires September 15.  Do not think there is a better deal out there if the offer expires.  --  Because of production issues, missing the deadline could result in hundreds of millions of dollars in additional costs to you.  --  It is simply too late to be discussing off-sets or financing issues.  --  It is inappropriate to be making demands unrelated to the LOA.  --  The USG has been consistent in its position that Pakistan must have adequate national funding up front for the sale to proceed.  --  After the agreement is signed, the USG will continue to assist Pakistan on issues regarding the F-16 program. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE146996|06STATE147083|06STATE148119", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/12/2006 3:41", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 018012  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/11/2016 TAGS: AF, KAWC, PHUM, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: DEMARCHES DELIVERED:  SPEECH ON GWOT DETAINEES, NEXT STEPS ON DETAINEE RELEASES AND NOTIFICATION OF DETAINEE TRANSFERRED TO GTMO  REF: A. STATE 146996      B. STATE 148119      C. STATE 147083  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C)  On September 7, 2006, PolCouns presented Ref A points to MFA (Americas) Director Mansood Khan.  Khan appreciated the briefing and requested additional information on draft to establish military commission and the timeline for Congressional action.  DCM also presented the same points to Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan in a separate September 7 meeting.  2.  (S)  On September 11, DCM presented to MFA (Americas) Additional Secretary Shahid Kamal points on the repatriation of two (2) Pakistani detainees from GTMO and six (6) Pakistani detainees from Bagram (Ref B), as well as notification that a Pakistani national was among the 14 detainees transferred from CIA custody to the GTMO detention facility (Ref C).  Kamal took the points under advisement. Post will follow up with the MFA to secure information on the Government of Pakistan's primary point-of-contact for the transfer of the Pakistani detainees.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/14/2006 9:24", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 018189  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O.12356: DECL: upon receipt TAGS: PREL, PGOV,  PK SUBJECT:  Test message  CLASSIFIED Mel Rollins, IMO, CL REASON: 1.4 (G), DRV FROM: DOS CLASSIFICATION GUIDE, DTD JUN 89.  This cable is a test for Lahore's EACT Classified cable delivery system - Thursday, September 14, 2006, 2006.  Gloria/Joe, please acknowledge receipt.  (S) TROPICAL STORM Mel is CURRENTLY TRACKING TOWARD Lahore Pakistan and he's angry!   Crocker " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/14/2006 9:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 018190  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O.12356: DECL: upon receipt TAGS: ACOA SUBJECT:  Test message  CLASSIFIED Mel Rollins, IMO, CL REASON: 1.4 (G), DRV FROM: DOS CLASSIFICATION GUIDE, DTD JUN 89.  This cable is a test for Lahore's EACT Classified cable delivery system - Thursday, September 14, 2006, 2006.  Gloria/Joe, please acknowledge receipt.  (S) TROPICAL STORM Mel is CURRENTLY TRACKING TOWARD Lahore Pakistan and he's angry!   Crocker " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/18/2006 10:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 018379  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR P, SCA, PM  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: AF, MCAP, MOPS, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAKISTAN MILITARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO OPERATIONS MOUNTAIN THRUST AND MOUNTAIN FURY  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker. Reasons: 1.4  (b) and (d)  --------------------------------- Introduction and Comment ----------------------------------- 1.  (C)  Operation MTN Thrust began in Southern Afghanistan (Kandahar, Helmand, and Nimroz) in May.  The Operation set the conditions for NATO Operation Medusa, which began in July.  Operation MTN Fury began in Eastern Afghanistan (Ghazni, Loghar, Paktika, Paktiya, and Khowst) August 1, with decisive operations beginning on September 13.  Prior to the operations, Combined Joint Task Force - 76 (CJTF - 76) and Office of Defense Representative Pakistan (ODRP) presented goals for the operations to the Pakistan military (Pak-Mil leadership and requested assistance preventing infiltration and exfiltration across the Pak-Afghan border.  2.  (C)  Comment:  ODRP reports that cooperation from Pak-Mil has been good.  (Note:  Because the GOP historically views the Baloch/Kandahar border as a law enforcement issue rather than a military and security one, the extra troop presence was provided strictly in response to U.S. requests.  End Note.)  ODRP notes that, while support to  Operation MTN Thrust was useful, the GOP relied heavily on the Frontier Corps (FC), whose troops continued to be less capable than the Pakistan Army's.  Pakistan security forces, especially the FC, had limited mobility due to lack of air and ground assets to cover expansive distances on a less-than-optimal road system.   ODRP reports the Pak-Mil's increased presence enhanced the closure of  the border between Afghanistan and Balochistan and resulted in the arrests and contraband seizures noted in paragraph 4.  Nevertheless, committed groups of anti-coalition militias (ACMs) were still able to avoid the heightened presence and cross the border.  (C)  Comment continued:  While some observers intitially feared that the North Waziristan Agency jirga agreement might complicate Pak-Mil support to Operation MTN Fury, the GOP continues to assure post that the agreement will not change Pak-Mil support and commitment to the operation.  Cross border activity by ACMs would violate the agreement and could be met by Pakistani military action.  Furthermore, Pak-Mil has assured us that total troop numbers in NWA have not changed since the agreement was signed on September 5.  Less than a week into decisive operations, it is too early to guage GOP effectiveness in combatting ACM cross-border activity.  End Comment  ----------------------------------- Operation Mountain Thrust -----------------------------------  4.  (C)  Pak-Mil reports that, operating in Balochistan, it has obtained the following results since the operation began in May:  --No important cross border militia movement --Good cooperation from the Pakistan civil administration --Free medical camps established in remote border areas treating more than 2500 Pakistani patients and distributing rupees 500,000 (USD 8,000) in medicines --Apprehension of 726 illegal Afghans --Apprehension of 12 Anti-coalition militia suspects from Wana, South Waziristan Agency --Apprehension of four foreign fighters (Turkish nationals) --Seizure of arms and ammunition of various caliber --Seizure of 10,469 kilos of narcotics and arrest of 15 individuals  ---------------------------------- Operation Mountain Fury  ISLAMABAD 00018379  002 OF 002   ----------------------------------  5.  (C)  Based on the U.S. military's goals for Operation MTN Fury, Pak-Mil has developed the following principles for its reaction to the operation, which began August 1.  (Decisive operations began September 13.)  --hold sensitive crossing points in strength to deny infiltration and exfiltration; --position quick reaction forces (QRFs) in each sector to reinforce the established posts and to deny freedom of movement to anti-coalition militias (ACMs); --maintain sufficiently strong reserves, including Special Services Group forces (SSGs) supported by aviation and artillery in each sector to retain offensive capability; --preempt ACM activity through well conceived and coordinated intelligence collection plans while keeping the border under effective surveillance; --assist coalition forces by sealing the border during the conduct of Operation MTN Fury, preventing cross border movement at all costs.  6.  (C)  Troop deployments in FATA in response to  Operation MTN Fury:  North Waziristan Agency: 7 Division: 6th Brigade, 27th Brigade, 117th Brigade, 207th Brigade (12 Army battalions and 12 Frontier Corps Wings along the border.) (Note:  Each FC Wing consists of 600 troops.  End Note.)  South Waziristan Agency: 9 Division:  116th Brigade; 325th Brigade (6 Army battalions and 8 Frontier Corps Wings along the border.)  Kurram Agency: Five Frontier Corps Wings (less two companies) One Army battalion reserve One company-size and five platoon-size quick reaction forces  Khyber Agency: Three Frontier Corps Wings Three platoon-size quick reaction forces  Mohmad Agency: Three Frontier Corps Wings Three platoon-size quick reaction forces  Bajaur Agency Seven (plus) Frontier Corps Wings. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE145269", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/19/2006 12:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 018473  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  FOR S/CT (ECROWE)  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, KTFN, PTER SUBJECT: TERRORISM FINANCE: COMMENTS ON DRAFT PAPER ON DISRUPTING EXTERNAL FINANCING TO THE TALIBAN  REF: A) STATE 145269 B) GRENCIK-MAIER E-MAIL 09/18/06  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S/NF)  Embassy Islamabad provides the following comments and observations on the draft \"Disrupting External Financing to the Taliban\" paper.  These comments are in addition to those forwarded to SCA/PB in Ref. B.  2.  (S/NF)  In \"Introduction\":   Office of the Defense Representative Pakistan (ODRP) requests the removal of the term \"tactical\", which has a specific military meaning not apparently intended in this context.  3.  (S/NF)  Under \"Taliban financing sources and streams\": RAO and ODRP both question  the accuracy of the statement \"Intelligence reports, as well as diplomatic engagements with particular government interlocutors, also point to ongoing support from Pakistani Intelligence (ISID), though the nature and amount of this support and the degree to which it reflects official GOP policy, is not always clear.\"  Post notes there is a difference between individuals associated with ISID and \"Pakistani Intelligence.\"  Additionally, post would be interested in more information on which specific \"government interlocutors\" have recently made these accusations.  4.  (S/NF)  ECON notes that, while the paper details Afghan government programs to combat terror financing, it does not mention Pakistan's draft Anti-Money Laundering bill, which could pass later this autumn, nor the GOP's work on a Charities Registration Act that would prevent charities from conducting cash to terrorist organizations.  Additionally, the GOP is studying ways to regulate hawalas and cash couriers.  5.  (S/NF)  Diplomatic and public diplmacy elements of this policy:  This is a difficult public diplomacy environment, so ample time to prepare for any new USG policies will be crucial.  Public diplomacy should specifically target the financial services sector.  6.  (S/NF)  (Diplomatic elements continued):  Post has worked hard in recent years to encourage AML and charity registration regulations.  The problems encountered in enacting AML and other legisltation center on the Legislative Assembly's difficulty in passing meaningful, salutory laws on most topics, including these.  We believe AML and related legislation will eventually pass, so it is important now to train civil servants and regulators who will have the necessary skills to enforce the regulations once they take effect.  7.  (U)  Post appreciates the opportunity to comment on this draft. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD18474|06STATE152582", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/19/2006 12:46", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 018474  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, PK, OREP, AFIN SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR STAFFDEL PHELAN  REF: STATE 152582  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Mr. Michael Phelan, Professional Staff Member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committe from September 25, 2006 to September 28, 2006.  The purpose of the visit is to assess the progress made and the ongoing challenges faced by the United States and its international partners in Afghanistan.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be Political Officer, Mohammed Motiwala.  He can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy: 92-51-208-0000; Office: 92-51-208-2624; Fax: 92-51-208-2537; Cell: 0300-501-2202.  3.  A single room has been reserved at the Marriott Hotel for arrival on September 25 and departure on September 28.  Hotel contact number is: 92 51 282-6121.  4.  The control officer will meet Mr. Phelan upon arrival at the airport in Islamabad.  Transportation will be provided to the airport on the day of departure.  5.   Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates.  Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  6. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows \"Work at the U.S. Embassy\" or \"Official Business\" as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  7.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or  SIPDIS photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  8.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance.  Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006.  A grenade attack against the Pr otestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002.  American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  All DOD military and civilian personnel on TDY, TAD, or PCS orders to Pakistan are required to notify the Force Protection Detachment (FPD), US Embassy, Pakistan of their travel plan/itinerary.  Notifications must be made well in advance prior to arrival in country, principally if FPD support is needed.  Upon arrival into country, DOD personnel are required to check in with the FPD to receive a current  ISLAMABAD 00018474  002 OF 004   threat briefing, as well as to be reminded of applicable force protection countermeasures.  Failure to comply with this requirement may result in either denial of current or future country clearances.  FPD e-mail addresses are as follows:  FPDPakistan@state.sgov.gov and FPDPakistan@state.gov  9.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French engineers.  As well, an October 2004 bombing in the lobby of the Islamabad Marriott injured a number of people, several seriously.  A.  Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors.  Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotels, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors.  All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel. B.  The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --  TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --  TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it.  They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before scheduled departure. --  The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use.  Buffet breakfast service will be available there.  TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or dinner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel.  There is no extra charge for this service.  Room service is also available at no extra charge. --  TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and the Marriott have been instructed to house Embassy personnel in the back, away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarize themselves with the emergency exits on their floors immediately after check-in.  Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  10.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-520-4200 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-526-8800  11.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals.  Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver's License is not valid in Pakistan.  12. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions;  ISLAMABAD 00018474  003 OF 004   these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than 'good samaritan' care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State's Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC's contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive.  PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services.  The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought  ISLAMABAD 00018474  004 OF 004   with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November.  Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2006 13:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 018707  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, SNAR, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: LAHORE POST CLEARANCE REQUEST MOHAMMED MOTIWALA  1.  Embassy requests post clearance for Poloff, Mohammed Motiwala, for personal travel to Lahore from September 30 to October 1.  2. Mr. Motiwala's itinerary is as follows: Arrive Lahore September 30 at 8:50 am via PK 385 Depart Lahore October 1 at 8:00 pm via PK 388  3. Mr. Motiwala requests assistance in hotel arrangements and transportation to/from the airport.    BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17766", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2006 13:12", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 018708  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2016 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, ECON, PREF, PTER, EAID, MASS, PINR, AF SUBJECT: EMBASSY ISLAMABAD-EMBASSY KABUL-CFC-A CONSULTATIONS READ OUT  REF: A. GRENCIK-AGUILAR E-MAIL 09/14/06      B. ISLAMABAD 17766  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U) This is a joint Embassy Islamabad-Embassy Kabul-CFC-A cable.  2. (S/NF) Summary.  On September 12, select Embassy Islamabad, Embassy Kabul and CFC-A personnel met to discuss the security situation in the border areas and ways to improve the political, economic and social ties between Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Participants focused on President Musharraf and President Karzai's upcoming visits to the U.S. Both Embassies were encouraged by recent high-level meetings between Pakistani and Afghan officials, but agreed that much work remained to improve relations.  Participants greeted the North Waziristan agreement between the Government of Pakistan (GOP) and tribal elders with cautious optimism, recommending that the USG aggressively monitor the situation for the presence of foreign fighters in North Waziristan and the number of anti-coalition and ISAF incidents across the border.  Prior to the next consultations, participants will promote further political exchanges between the Government of Afghanistan (GOA) and GOP, monitor potential harmful elements in refugee camps, and work to encourage economic ties between Pakistan and Afghanistan.  End summary.  Overview and Introduction ------------------------- 3. (C) On September 12, Ambassador Crocker, U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Neumann, CFC-A Commander LTG Eikenberry, and their senior staffs met at Embassy Islamabad.  The group discussed upcoming bilateral and trilateral meetings between POTUS, President Musharraf of Pakistan, and President Karzai of Afghanistan; assessed the Afghan-Pakistan relationship; reviewed the border security situation; and discussed ways to improve USG efforts in promoting economic, social, and political development in both Pakistan and Afghanistan.  4. (S/NF) In his opening remarks Ambassador Crocker outlined developments in Pakistan-Afghan relations, including recent meetings of senior officials.  He said that the working groups would have a special responsibility to develop ideas that could be forwarded to Washington to consider while preparing for upcoming bilateral and trilateral meetings in the U.S. (REF A)  5. (S/NF) Ambassador Neumann reported that President Karzai's approach towards Pakistan had changed recently.  President Karzai was much more focused on assuring President Musharraf that both Pakistan and Afghanistan had a common enemy. Ambassador Neumann said Karzai \"was not an instrumentalist. He is not taken with organizational structures or confidence building measures.\"  President Karzai was concerned that President Musharraf would not support a secular Pashtun-led Afghan government over the long-term and noted Karzai needed to be reassured in this regard.  Ambassador Neumann described the insurgency as getting worse in Afghanistan, with fighting picking back up in the east and south, with Zabol increasingly threatened.  6. (S/NF) LTG Eikenberry said that the political situation in Afghanistan looked much better than the security situation. He described the seriousness of the security challenges in Afghanistan and the effort to neutralize mid-level Taliban commanders, who used Pakistan both for sanctuary and as a command and control base.  Update since previous consultations in June ------------------------------------------- 7. (C/NF) Participants were encouraged by several important developments in the Pakistan-Afghanistan relationship since  ISLAMABAD 00018708  002 OF 004   the last consultations on 7 June.  Both countries' national security advisors, intelligence chiefs and presidents had met since then.  Although GOA and GOP relations had improved since February/March, participants agreed much work remained to eliminate lingering suspicions each government had of the other.  The group recommended continuing to encourage exchanges between GOP and GOA political leaders. Participants agreed to engage both governments to reinvigorate an apparently dormant agreement between the GOP and GOA to have regular ministerial-level meetings.  Upcoming Washington visits -------------------------- 8. (S/NF) Much of the discussion focused on preparing ideas to send to Washington in the lead-up to President Musharraf's and President Karzai's upcoming visits to the U.S. The bilateral and trilateral meetings with President Bush will provide an excellent opportunity to address and advance important USG strategic interests, including the significant upswing in violence in Afghanistan; questions concerning President Karzai's leadership abilities; and Pakistan's agreement with militants in North Waziristan.  (Note: Ref A were specific recommendations for POTUS bilateral and trilateral meetings to SCA. End note.)  Border Security and North Waziristan Agreement -------------------------- 9. (S/NF) Presentations by CFC-A and Office of Defense Representative Pakistan (ODRP) detailed the increase in anti-coalition incidents along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border in recent months.  The command and control operations for many of the anti-coalition incidents emanated from Pakistan, particularly the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). Key insurgent command and control nodes also existed in Quetta, Peshawar and Miram Shah.  Insurgents exploited the Durand Line's porous nature to conduct cross-border hit-and-run attacks from their sanctuary inside Pakistan and used Pakistan as a base for recruiting new militants, notably from border-area madrassas.  ODRP briefed that the GOP deployed 74,000 troops in the FATA.  The majority of the troops were not/not a part of the regular army, but were poorly trained, ill equipped paramilitary forces, including the Frontier Corps and civil armed forces. Following the North Waziristan jirga agreement the GOP will redeploy some forces from deep inside North Waziristan to areas closer to the border, to be used at checkpoints and as 'rapid reaction forces.'  10. (S/NF) Meeting participants discussed at length the strategic implications of the September 5 North Waziristan Agency (NWA) jirga agreement between the GOP and tribal elders (REF B).  A CFC-A briefer presented diagrams showing that, since the June cease-fire between the GOP and militant groups operating out of NWA, attacks on coalition forces near the NWA border had actually increased in frequency.  Analysts thus concluded that the cease-fire had not led to a decrease in cross-border militant activity from the NWA.  Some analysts questioned whether the jirga agreement would succeed in lowering anti-coalition militant support from the NWA, since the cease-fire had failed to do so.  Although participants ultimately were cautiously optimistic that the agreement could lead to improvements in border security, there was consensus on the need to strongly emphasize to the GOP that interested parties needed to see measurable results, most importantly a decrease in attacks on coalition and ISAF forces.  Estimates of how long it would take to assess the success of the agreement varied from sixty days to one year. The group agreed there should not be a specific timetable for judging the success of the agreement, but the USG would continue to monitor the anti-coalition activities that emanated out of Pakistan and the presence of foreign fighters in the FATA.  If anti-coalition activities near the Afghan border did not drop, the USG would press the GOP for a  ISLAMABAD 00018708  003 OF 004   different solution.  Status of Afghan Refugees ------------------------- 11. (C/NF) The GOP was now focused on the mandatory registration of Afghan refugees who were counted in the 2005 census and did not plan to close any more camps this year. The participants recommended close monitoring of the activities taking place in the remaining camps.  Ambassador Crocker noted that some of the refugee camps are breeding grounds for unwelcome elements, including terrorists and narco-traffickers.  Islamabad RefCoord was making make discreet inquiries with IO and NGO officials about the security situation in the camps and would have a report by November 1.  The Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) was now manning check posts at large camps such as Girdi Jungle. Both Ambassadors noted that an inter-agency effort was needed to gain accurate USG reporting of activities in the remaining refugee camps.  Economic and Social development ------------------------------- 12. (SBU) Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs) and FATA development figured prominently in the discussions of economic and social development.  An ROZ assessment team recently conducted a study in Pakistan and was currently in Afghanistan.  A final report covering both Afghanistan and Pakistan was expected by late October.  The USG seemed much more interested in promoting the ROZ idea than either the GOP or GOA.  To make the ROZ concept successful, the GOP and GOA, needed to take greater ownership of the ROZ proposal.  Many Afghans were very suspicious of the whole concept, assuming that most of the economic benefits would flow to the Pakistani side.  Pakistan, in particular the private sector, had to help convince their Afghan counterparts of the economic benefits of working together. Participants proposed supporting possible joint or parallel visits by Pakistani and Afghan trade officials to study existing Qualified Industrial Zones in Egypt and/or Jordan.  13. (SBU) USAID Pakistan had recently re-opened its office in Peshawar after twelve years.  The USAID development program in the FATA mirrored national programs in terms of activities related to health, education, and economic growth.  USAID and the UK's Department For International Development (DFID) supported the FATA Secretariat in its efforts to develop a FATA development strategy, which was expected to be finalized in September.  Capacity and ownership remained as two vital concerns to FATA development and implementation of programs; while the GOP had been increasing allocations in recent years for development in the FATA, these funds had not been fully spent because of a lack of capacity.  14. (C) There was discussion about moving a trilateral economic process forward in a less formal way than through U.S. participation in the Afghan-Pakistan Joint Economic Commission, which meets infrequently and was not particularly productive.  Finally, USAID Afghanistan mentioned working with the new Afghan Education Minister Atmar, perhaps jointly with Minister Ghazi, to promote more moderate curricula in the madrassas.  Conclusion ------------ 15. (S/NF)  Participants agreed that the consultations were productive in generating ideas to improve the political, economic and security situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan and agreed to meet again in a few months. In the interim they agreed to do the following:     -- Work towards increasing the number and frequency of meetings between Pakistani and Afghan political leaders.  ISLAMABAD 00018708  004 OF 004      -- Aggressively monitor the North Waziristan jirgra agreement for the presence of foreign fighters in North Waziristan and cross border attacks on coalition and ISAF forces.    -- Monitor the presence of unwanted elements, such as terrorists and narco-traffickers, in refugee camps in Pakistan.    -- Support possible joint or parallel visits by Pakistani and Afghan trade officials to study existing Qualified Industrial Zones in Egypt and/or Jordon.    -- Work with the new Afghan Education Minister and the Pakistani Education Minister to promote moderate curricula in Afghan madrassas. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/22/2006 8:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 018778  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2016 TAGS: AF, EAID, PK, PREL SUBJECT: OPTIMISTIC VIEW ON PAK-AFGHAN RELATIONS FROM MFA  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  The MFA Afghanistan Director told PolOff September 20 that high level engagement between Pakistani and Afghan leaders would continue through the autumn and was, he hoped, becoming institutionalized.  The official reported that Presidents Karzai and Musharraf would meet on September 26 in New York and added that Musharaff's UNGA speech was designed to assure President Karzai that the GOP was committed to fighting the Taliban.   End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- -- High Level Engagement Continuing --------------------------------------------- --  2.  (C)  PolOff met with MFA (Afghanistan) Director Amir Shaukat on September 20.  Amir was quite optimistic about the direction of Pak-Afghan relations and cited President Musharraf's UNGA address the night before as evidence the GOP was committed to improving relations with Afghanistan.  He singled out Musharraf's reference to the Taliban's being the enemy of both Pakistan and Afghanistan as an attempt to assure President Karzai that the GOP was committed to stopping the Taliban.  Amir added that Presidents Karzai and Musharraf would hold a bilateral discusion on September 26, the day before the U.S.-Pakistan-Afghanistan trilateral.  3.  (C)  Amir was pleased with recent developments in high-level dialogues and was particularly excited by an upcoming (but still unscheduled) visit by the Speaker of Afghanistan's lower house, Younis Qanooni.  The GOP's analysis was that Qanooni was attempting to become more of a leader and statesman than just a politician.  Pakistani leaders had been particularly impressed with Qanooni's use of his office to squelch a draft bill that would have criticized Pakistan for the death of Baloch leader Nawab Bugti.  4.  (C)  Other meetings planned for after Ramadan include:  --FM Kasuri and FM Spanta, who last met in June.   (During a pull aside at the Economic Cooperation Organization meeting in Baku in May, the two FMs promised to meet quarterly, but had to postpone the September bilateral until after Ramadan because of UNGA and NAM travel.)  --The Pak-Afghan Joint Economic Committee, which last met at the ministerial level June 14-15.  --The ministerial level Tripartite Refugee Committee (Afghanistan, Pakistan and UNHCR,) which met May 30 and September 12.  --A study tour to Afghanistan of Pakistani journalists.  -------------- Comment -------------  5.  (C)  In a land of pessimists, Amir is a refreshing optimist, especially on Pak-Afghan cooperaton.  Embassy Kabul, who cleared this cable, notes that Amir's comments on Qanooni's possible transformation from political operative to statesman may indeed be optimistic, but the Embassy welcomes any attempts at fence-building. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/22/2006 10:47", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 018788  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  STATE FOR EB/CIP  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, FCC, ITU, ECPS SUBJECT: GOP REQUEST FOR HELP ON SATELLITE COORDINATION  1. (U) This cable contains an action request; see para 3.  2. (SBU) On September 22, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Disarmament-Director, Imran Haider, called in Poloff to pass diplomatic note Dismnt-1/9/06 dated September 22, 2006. The Government of Pakistan (GOP) is requesting the Department's help to facilitate coordinating frequencies between USG satellites and Pakistan's satellite, Paksat-1, at the 38 degree east longitude orbit.  Haider said the GOP is prepared to send a team to the United States to work out the issues or it could host a U.S. team in Pakistan.  (Note: Post has e-mailed a scanned copy of the diplomatic note and attached documents to SCA. End note.)  3. (SBU) Post requests SCA/PB assistance forwarding the GOP request to the relevant FCC office. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/25/2006 10:44", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 018902  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT. PLEASE PASS TO ALL SOUTH ASIAN COLLECTIVE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/25/2011 TAGS: PHUM, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SPOT REPORT - RUMORS OF A COUP  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary.  On September 24, Pakistan was abuzz with (unfounded) rumors of a coup against President Musharraf, who was away on official travel in the United States.  Cell phones and text messages allowed the rumor to quickly spread and many Government of Pakistan (GOP) and Embassy officials were fielding calls on reports of the coup.  In the end, reports of the coup were verified to be false, but the whole situation shed light into how susceptible the Pakistani public are in believing rumors.  End summary.  2. (SBU) Rumors of a coup started around 2:00 pm on a weekend, with government offices closed.  The circumstances on September 24 were ideal for a rumor of a coup to start: there were large-scale power outages throughout the country, with some places being without power for 12 hours; President Musharraf was out of the country in the U.S. and was unexpectedly undergoing medical examinations in Texas; Pakistani state television, PTV, was off the air for a few hours; and the recent military coup in Thailand was fresh in people's minds.  Some people had interpreted the nationwide power outages and PTV going off the air (which also occurred during the 1999 coup) as evidence that the military had taken over in President Musharraf's absence.  By late afternoon, Pakistanis inside and outside the country were busily trying to reach anyone who might be in the know to verify reports of a military coup.  3. (SBU) Embassy officers and FSNs started receiving inquires on coup rumors a little past 3:00 pm.  One Embassy official reported that her golfing partners, a former GOP official and his wife, were receiving dozens of phone calls and text messages trying to confirm reports of a military coup.  An Embassy FSN repeatedly received phone calls from throughout Punjab asking him if it was true that military helicopters were circling Islamabad and tanks were rolling down the streets of the capital.  Others received messages from as far away as Karachi and Quetta.  Other diplomatic missions in Islamabad also received similar inquires.  4. (U) By the early evening, the Embassy had confirmed from a variety of official sources that no coup had taken place. Later in the evening, news bulletins featured GOP officials who publicly denied any coup.  5. (C) Comment:  The speed with which the coup rumor spread and was believed speaks to the penchant for conspiracy theories and juicy rumors in Pakistan as well as the power of cell phones and text messages.  As Pakistan moves closer to elections in late 2007/early 2008, it is likely that more rumors of coups will appear.  End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16956", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/25/2006 11:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 018917  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2016 TAGS: KDEM, KWMN, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: HUDOOD ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS:  A BIG SLOPPY MESS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 16956       B. ISLAMABAD 14095      C. ISLAMABAD 12517  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and Introduction:  With President Musharraf on official travel in the U.S., the governing Pakistan Muslim League (PML) announced a tactical retreat in it beleaguered campaign to amend the Hudood Ordinance, the Sharia-based laws on criminalizing extramarital sexual relations and establishing often insurmountable evidentiary requirements for the prosecution of cases of rape.  As reported previously (Ref A, B and C), the PML-led government initiated the drive to amend the Hudood Ordinance in mid-summer, following a savvy print and broadcast media campaign enlisting a cross section of respected journalists, Islamic scholars and policy analysts in support of the need to amend laws widely perceived by progressive Pakistanis, as well as many in the international community, as deeply prejudicial to women.  2.  (C)  Before introducing the bill to amend the Ordinance in the National Assembly on August 21, PML floor managers struck a deal with the opposition populist Pakistan People's Party (PPP) to move the bill to an all-party Select Committee for expedited review, with the goal of shielding the text from extensive revision by the opposition coalition of Islamist parties, the Muttadidda Majlis-e-Ammal (MMA).  In this scenario, the Select Committee would consider the bill's Islamic credentials quietly, while the united opposition proceeded with an ultimately unsuccessful \"no confidence\" vote against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz on August 29.  (Ref C)  External events -- most notably, the August 26 death of Balochistan nationalist Nawab Aktar Bugti Khan in a confrontation with Pakistani security forces and subsequent emboldening of the MMA -- derailed the PML's maneuvering to rush the Hudood Amendment through parliament before President Musharraf's September travel to Brussels, Havana and NYC/WashDC.   What followed was two weeks of political mayhem, as an MMA threat to resign from the Provincial (NWFP and Balochistan) and National Assemblies spooked PML leaders into extra-parliamentary negotiations with MMA figures on regressive revisions to the proposed Hudood  amendments, provoking bitter denunciations by PPP, MQM and human rights activists that the government was (again) caving in to the mullahs.  3.  (C)  A month after the government's Hudood amendments were first introduced into parliament, the drama has come full circle:  PML President Chaudhary Shujaat Hussain announced on Sept 18 that having failed to to reach a compromise with the MMA, the PML would re-introduce the Hudood amendments for a National Assembly vote upon President Musharraf's return to Pakistan in early October.  Senior officials at PML House and in the Office of the President have assured the Ambassador and PolCouns that this time around, the government will see the amendments through without further delay.  End summary and introduction.  Death in Balochistan Opens Door for MMA --------------------------------------------- ------------ 4.  (C/NF)  At the close of the week following the government's introduction of the Hudood amendment bill into the National Assembly, it appeared that -- with the cooperation of coalition partner Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) and the opposition PPP -- the path for the bill's passage had been smoothly prepared for vote immediately following the August 29 no confidence vote.   News of the violent death of Nawab Bugti on August 26, however, injected a shot of adrenaline into the August 29 debate, racheting up the anticipated dry opposition accusations of financial mismanagement against the Prime Minister into a passionate condemnation of the extrajudicial killing by a military government of a renowned civilian politician.  The MMA one-upped calls by Baloch nationalists to withdraw from the provincial and national parliaments by declaring that its  ISLAMABAD 00018917  002 OF 004   members would resign their seats if the government went forward with the proposed Hudood amendments.  5.  (C/NF)  The MMA's threat to resign caught the attention of top PML leaders.  With a majority of seats in the NWFP Assembly and a coalition partner with nationalist parties in Balochistan, a united MMA has the clout to bring down both provincial governments, leaving the center little option other than imposing Governor's Rule; a walk-out of the MMA's 66 members in the National Assembly would leave the government vulnerable to calls for early parliamentary elections.  Shaken by the MMA threat, PML President Chaudhary Shujaat Hussain agreed to set up an extra-parliamentary PML - MMA committee to discuss revisions to the Hudood amendments to make the bill acceptable to some, if not all, of the Islamist parties.  Privately, Shujaat and other top PML leaders confided that they hoped to split the MMA, peeling Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam - Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) leader Maulana Fazl-ur-Rehman away from Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) Amir Qazi Hussain Ahmed.   Publicly, however, the prevailing perception in both the press and political circles was that Musharaff and the PML were succumbing to public pressure by the Islamists.  Media reports and cocktail party chatter through the first half of September were rife with speculation over MMA demands and government concessions on the text of the proposed amendments.  Sound and Fury, Signifying Virtually Nothing --------------------------------------------- ------------- 6.  (C/NF)  The chatter was not always off the mark.  On September 12, Federal Information Minister Durrani shared the text of MMA revisions he said PML negotiators had accepted, including provisions that would have established parallel jurisdictions under the Hudood Ordinance and the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) in rape cases; injected Sharia-based standards of evidence in to the PPC for rape cases; and created a new \"lewdness\" offense into the PPC, essentially inserting the Islamic concept of \"zina\" (sex outside marriage) into the PPC.   While European and U.S. diplomats and human rights activists scurried to discover what deals were being cut, PML leaders were slowly realizing that Fazl-ur Rehman was only  engaged in political flirtation in the PML-MMA negotiations.  Sources in the Office of the President and PML House told post that by mid-September, it was clear that efforts to neutralize constituent parties in the MMA on the Hudood amendments were pointless.  National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz told the Ambassador that, after a week or more of political flirtation with Fazl-ur-Rehman, both he and Qazi Hussain Ahmed were adamant that the Islamist parties would remain united in their pledge to resign if the government succeeds in passing the Hudood amendments.  Re-Group and Try Again -------------------------------- 7.  (C/NF)  On September 19, Ambassador discussed the GOP's plans to resuscitate the battered amendments bill.  NSA Tariq Aziz and PML Secretary General Senator Mushahid Hussain Sayed said that PML President Chaudhary Shujaat Hussain has sent a memo to President Musharraf's traveling party outlining the state-of-play following the breakdown of negotiations with the MMA.  Aziz and Hussain said that the government would re-introduce the amendments following Musharraf's return to Pakistan on/about October 1, presenting the text that emerged from the all-party Select Committee, with the addition of the PPC \"lewdness\" provision plus \"firewalls.\"  (Note: \"Firewalls\" are supplemental clauses crafted to ensure that rape remains severed from zina, such as language that would prevent a rape complainant from being charged with any other crime in connection with the complaint -- i.e., a woman's rape complaint could not later be used as a self-incriminatory confession leading to a zina or lewdness case -- and that would impose automatic perjury penalties on witnesses who testify in zina cases that that the courts determine are unfounded.  End note.)  The Government is confident that the PPP will vote for the Select Committee's text, and that the MQM can be brought on board.   The Ambassador was firm in telling Aziz and Hussain that  ISLAMABAD 00018917  003 OF 004   injecting the lewdness provision into the Penal Code will be perceived as a concession to MMA demands; the time has come for President Musharraf and the PML-led government to decide what principals they will stand on.  (Note:  The Ambassador's words clearly made an impression: in a Sept 21 conversation with PolCouns, Mushahid Hussain said that the party is now debating whether to push to move the lewdness provision into the Penal Code, a move he claimed to oppose personally.  End note.)  Whither the MMA? ------------------------- 8.  (C/NF)  Despite MMA threats to walk out should the parliament pass the Hudood amendments, both Aziz and Mushahid Hussain are skeptical that the MMA would actually follow through with mass resignations from the Provincial and National Assemblies:  MMA members in the provincial assemblies are enjoying the perks of their offices too much to want to leave prematurely.  In the National Assembly, many MMA members (particularly those from JUI-F) are presently sitting under a sword of Damocles, as a Supreme Court hearing is scheduled for late September on whether madrassa-based education meet existing laws on the academic qualifications for elected officials.  Most observers anticipate that when the Court finally issues a ruling, the decision will go against the MMA.   This case has been on the Court's docket for almost four years, in tacit recognition of the government's desire to avoid a confrontation with the MMA on the credentials question.  If the MMA does not go through with the threat to resign,  the government can again signal the Court that further procedural delays are in order; alternatively, if the Islamic parties walk out, a Court ruling disqualifying significant numbers of MMA leaders from holding public office would not be long to follow.  Collateral Damage ------------------------ 9.  (C/NF)  The political battle between moderates and conservatives over the Hudood Ordinance amendments has already claimed one victim:  on September 20, Dr. Javed Ahmed Ghamdi, a moderate member of the Council of Islamic Ideology (CII),  resigned his position, saying that the government had undermined the CII, a constitutionally-established advisory body, when it formed the extra-parliamentary \"Ulema Committee\" to review the text of the proposed amendments with the MMA.  If the government incorporates the revisions suggested by this committee, Dr. Ghamdi said to the Daily Times, it will preserve the status quo of laws that discriminate against women.  Dr. Ghamdi's objections to the MMA proposed revisions, such as incorporating the lewdness offense and Sharia evidentiary requirements into the PPC, are themselves contrary to Islamic injunctions.  (Note:  Dr. Ghamdi's departure is a blow to President Musharraf's efforts to transform the CII from a bastion of fundamentalism to a force for enlightened moderation.  A Musharraf- appointee, Ghamdi was the swing vote on the CII; behind the scenes.  He worked closely with Attorney General Makhdoom Ali Khan on drafting the proposed Hudood amendments (please protect), approaching the issue as an Islamic scholar.  Mushahid Hussain told PolCouns he was worried that the CCI chairman, Dr. Muhammad Khalid Masood, would be the next to resign.  End note.)  Comment ------------ 10. (C/NF)  The GOP's efforts to advance the Hudood Ordinance amendments bring to mind the analogy of legislation and sausage-making;  nobody should have to see what goes into the finished product.  This unseemly process has re-confirmed the worst suspicions of the Musharraf regime's many opponents that the President is not serious about \"enlightened moderation\" and that the PML-led coalition will always put its political interests before principal, caving into MMA fundamentalist demands even when it has the votes to move its legislation forward.  11. (C/NF)  The ups-and-down of the Hudood amendments have  ISLAMABAD 00018917  004 OF 004   been dizzying to follow, but some truths have come home: other than a thin veneer of political and media progressives, the human rights community (and, of course, Western diplomats), there is no broad constituency in Pakistan clamoring to amend the existing Hudood Ordinance.  A generation has come of age under General Zia's Hudood and, despite well-documented cases of abuse and injustice, this is not an issue that resonates deeply with either Pakistan's ruling elite or its socially conservative masses.  It is not just the MMA who oppose amending the Hudood:  both PML and PPP party whips have their work cut out for them, enforcing party discipline on parliamentarians who are not inclined to take up the cause of women's rights.  12.  (C/NF)  Post believes that the text that emerged from the National Assembly Select Committee represents significant progress in remedying the worst evils of Zia's Hudood Ordinance, leaving open the possibility of additional amendments in the future.  As emboffs continue to monitor the bill's progress, post recommends that the USG takes its cue from the PPP, MQM and progressive parliamentary leaders:  in the spirit of not allowing the perfect become the enemy of the good, if Pakistan's progressive politicians are satisfied that the proposed amendments enhance legal protections for women and back the government's bill, then so should we.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17548|06ISLAMABAD17594", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/25/2006 12:58", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 018929  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/25/2016 TAGS: CVIS, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: REQUEST FROM GOP TO BAN TRAVEL BY ALLEGED BLA SUPPORTERS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 17594 AND PREVIOUS      B. ISLAMABAD 17548 AND PREVIOUS      C. 05 ISLAMAMBAD 19491 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable contains action requests; please see para. 8.  2.  (SBU) On September 14, the Consular Section received a diplomatic note from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) presenting a list of 80-some individuals that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) asserts are connected to the Balochistan National Army (BLA). (Note:  Full text of the note follows, below; post will email SCA/PB and CA/VO/L/C a copy of the list that accompanied the note verbale. End note.)  The MFA note requests that the USG not issue visas to the listed individuals for travel to the U.S.; that the individuals be placed on Department of Homeland Security (DHS) watch lists; that U.S. visas previously issued to any listed individual be canceled; and that any listed individual currently in the U.S. be repatriated to Pakistan.   The note states that the GOP will not take responsibility for actions committed abroad by any listed individuals who are issued a visa, whose visa is not canceled or who is not repatriated to Pakistan. Neither the note nor the list provides any specific information as to the activities of these individuals that constitute support for terrorism; the list notes only that all individuals listed have been charged with \"anti-state/terrorist activities.\"  3.  (C)  As reported septel, the GOP has been particularly focused on the nationalist insurgency in Balochistan since late 2005. (Ref A and B)  Pakistani security forces have aggressively pursued nationalist fighters, most dramatically in the security operations that led to the death of Nawab Aktar Bugti Khan on August 26.  (Ref C)  The GOP's security operations in Balochistan have been accompanied by well-documented reports from human rights activists of disappearances, reprisals, property seizures and other human rights violations against nationalist politician, Baloch journalists and extended family members of nationalist fighters.  4.  (C/NF)  Post is also aware that in July, at the request of the GOP, the UK designated the BLA as a terrorist organization and imposed travel restrictions on persons associated with the BLA.  Officers from the British High Commission (BHC) in Islamabad have told post that the GOP, particularly the Director General of Military Operations, was exerting considerable pressure on the UK to proceed with the BLA designation.  BHC officers explained that the designation process in the UK is not/not subject to the extensive analysis and documentation required under U.S. law, and that the designation was undertaken primarily so that the UK could take legal action against Baloch student and nationalist organizations and websites believed to be raising funds to support the insurgency.  These officers could offer no specific insight into the composition, leadership or organization of the BLA.  5.  (C)  In recent years, the GOP has blamed the BLA for terrorist bombings in Punjab and Sindh Provinces, as well as acts of sabotage against infrastructure and government-sponsored development projects in Balochistan. While these acts of violence have undeniably occurred, post has yet to encounter a political observer in Pakistan who can give shape to the BLA as an entity.  Its leadership and organization are unknown.  Most of post's interlocutors suggest that there is no organized entity as such; they posit that the BLA is a nom-de-guerre used by nationalist fighters from the Marri tribe when convenient.  6.  (S/NF)  In light of the atmosphere described above, Post has initiated an internal review of the individuals on the  ISLAMABAD 00018929  002 OF 002   GOP list, virtually of whom are already on Pakistan's Exit Control List.  The names fall into the following categories:  -- Persons involved in armed insurrection against the GOP (8 individuals - Nawabzada Brahamdagh Khan Bugti, Mir Ali Bugti, Nawab Khair Baksh Marri, Gazin Marri, Mir Hair Bayar Marri, Balaach Marri, Zamran Marri, and Jumma Khan) -- Persons about whom the Embassy would require additional information to determine connection to violence arising from the nationalist insurgency (6 individuals -- Shahzain Bugti, Agha Shahid Bugti, Murtaza Bugti, Mir Chakkar Bugti, Hamza Marri and Chengez Marri) -- Persons who appear to be listed for purely political purposes or who are unknown to post (approx 66 individuals)  7.  (S/NF)  Post has confirmed that seven of the eight individuals known to be directly involved in nationalist violence have already been entered in State/DHS systems via the Visas Viper system.  (Note:  The one exception is Mir Hair Bayar Marri. End note.)  Post is in the process of determining whether any other listed individual has already been entered into State/DHS systems.  Pending receipt of guidance from the Department, post is prepared to request additional information on the eight individuals for links to the nationalist insurgency.  As to the remaining names on the MFA list, post recommends that no/no action be taken with regard to the issuance/revocation of visas or other measures to restrict travel to the U.S.  8. (C/NF)  Action Requests:  Post requests Department guidance on appropriate response to the MFA note.  Post would appreciate WashDC agencies' assessment of the BLA and whether it actually constitutes a terrorist organization.  Post also requests analysis from WashDC agencies on the UK decision to designate the BLA as a terrorist organization, as well as the legal and practical effects of that designation.  9. (SBU)  Text of the September 13 MFA note verbale:  (Begin text.)  No. USA-2/5/06  13 September 2006  The Ministry of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad and has the honour to enclose herewith a consolidated list (page 1-60 of Pakistani nationals who are on the adverse notice list for their connections with the Balochistan National Army, which is a banned organization in Pakistan and in the United Kingdom as well.  The Government of Pakistan suggests that the individuals in the enclosed list may not be issued visas to travel to the United States and should be placed on the United States Homeland Security List. If these individuals are already in possession of visas issued by the United States, their visas should be revoked. Furthermore if these individuals are already in the United States they should be repatriated to Pakistan.  The Ministry has the honour to further state that the Government of Pakistan would not take any responsibility for the actions committed abroad by the individuals in the attached list with respect to:  (i)  individuals who are issued visas; (ii) individuals whose visas have not been revoked; or (iii) those individuals who are already in the United States have not been repatriated to Pakistan.  The Ministry avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the united States of America in Islamabad the assurances of its highest consideration.  (End text.)  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE157283|06STATE160278", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 7:11", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 018997  SIPDIS  SIPDIS SENSITIVE  STATE - PLEASE PASS TO ALL SOUTH ASIAN COLLECTIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PHUM, UN, PREL, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHES DELIVERED ON UN HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL  REF: A. STATE 157283      B. STATE 160278  1. (SBU) On September 26, poloff delivered ref A and B demarche points to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Human Rights and Security Council) Assistant-Director Wajit Hashmi. Hashmi said he would take demarche points under advisement and would forward them to his superiors. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 13:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 019121  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2016 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS (1):  THE CYCLICAL NATURE OF PAKISTANI POLITICS   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C) Pakistan is now entering a year of high political stakes, as President Musharraf grapples with his own future in the run-up to provincial and federal parliamentary while political allies and rivals parry and position themselves for possible post-election scenarios.  These elections will play out against the tortured history of Pakistani democracy, a cycle that has repeated itself with dismaying regularity.  2.  (C)  This is the first in a series of cables mapping the political terrain as Pakistan approaches National and Provincial Assembly elections.  This cable examines some of that history as it bears on Musharraf's decision-making process and constrains his options.  Septel cables in this series will focus on the fundamentals of Pakistan,s political institutions and electoral timelines, the state-of-play within the parties and electorate, whether President/General Musharraf will shed his uniform, Musharraf's coalition options and recommendations on how the U.S. can best promote credible and open elections.   Democracy in Pakistan: The Long and Winding Road --------------------------------------------- ---  3. (C/NF) Pakistan has never been a functioning democracy, nor has it ever been a military dictatorship.  Its civilian leaders have never been particularly democratic in orientation and its military leaders have never been particularly dictatorial (though General Zia ul-Haq came close).  Rather, following a chaotic period of civilian rule between 1947 and 1958, Pakistan has been an unstable and dysfunctional amalgam, with the military seeking simultaneously to engage and rein in the civilians and the civilians doing the same with the military -- both with varying degrees of success.  Civilian (Un)Democrats v. Military (Un)Dictators --------------------------------------------- ---  4. (C/NF) Pakistan's civilian leaders, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in the 1970s and Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif in the 1990s have all left much to be desired in the democracy department.  Z.A. Bhutto was arguably more dictatorial than any Pakistani leader before or after, civilian or military.  He established the Pakistan People's Party as a vehicle to advance his personal ambitions.  He brooked no dissent from his party colleagues (establishing a precedent for his daughter), arrested political opponents and established a private paramilitary service answerable to him alone.  The current head of the Awami National Party, Asfandyar Wali Khan, has shared graphic descriptions with post of being tortured in Bhutto,s prison.  Benazir and Nawaz never enjoyed the power wielded by Z.A. Bhutto, but even within their more limited remit, they were far from democratic ) a characteristic best illustrated by the autocratic way they continue to run their respective political parties.  Both the Benazir and Nawaz governments were also notoriously corrupt.  5. (C/NF) Nawaz and Benazir, although now in exile, manage their parties as personal fiefdoms.  Each would prefer to see their parties weakened to the point of irrelevancy than to permit alternate leadership to emerge.  Nawaz has stifled the ambitions of his capable brother, Shabaz.  Benazir has succeeded in driving away many of the most able members of her party, including Pakistan's current Interior Minister, Aftab Sherpao, who now leads a breakaway PPP faction.  By contrast, the party's anointed, in-country leader, Makhdoom Amin Fahim, is an aging feudal landowner singularly lacking in charisma.  Fahim is also an ironic choice to be heading Pakistan's premier progressive party: he has several wives and has reportedly married his sisters to the Quran -- a  ISLAMABAD 00019121  002 OF 003   practice that kept his estates together at the expense of his sisters' marriage prospects.  Military Rule:  More Than A Veneer of Democracy --------------------------------------------- --  6. (C/NF) For its part, Pakistan's army has traditionally shied away from monopolizing power for extended periods, preferring to \"manage\" civilian politicians and drive through constitutional adjustments to protect its prerogatives and its vision of the national interest.  The military is keenly attuned to Pakistan's vulnerabilities, whether from external enemies (e.g., India) or internal threats in the provinces (e.g., Baloch nationalism).  As India's economy has boomed, senior Pakistani military leaders have realized that the economy is also a national security concern.  In the military's eyes, civilians are nave on matters of strategy, threatening the nation's security through corruption and mismanagement of the economy.  7. (C/NF)  Whether in or out of power, the Army has enforced an unwritten rule that effectively bars civilians from interfering in matters of national security (Kashmir, India, Afghan policy), military procurement, defense spending and internal military administration (such as promotions).  When in power, the Army has sought to maintain the trappings of democracy, including referenda, elections and national assemblies.  President Musharraf has taken this further than any of Pakistan's previous military leaders, moving to devolve authority to the local level by establishing local bodies with indirectly-elected leaders at the District level (nazims), who have de jure decision-making and financial authority.  (Note: In practice, management of district governments often remains in the the de facto control of local powerbrokers and/or \"the agencies.\"  End note.)  The press has more freedom than under any of Musharraf's predecessors, civilian or military:  it vigorously criticizes Musharraf himself, his political allies and the army, and openly reports the latest initiatives by opposition parties. The Supreme Court has signaled a modest but increasing willingness to act independently of the government following the appointment of a new Chief Justice last year, ruling against the government in several recent high profile cases.  8. (C/NF) Musharraf does not have untrammeled decision-making power, an ironic source of frustration to Pakistani liberals, who sometimes quietly murmur that he should be more dictatorial in pushing through human rights reforms.  For example, the government was either unable or unwilling to buck Islamist parties opposed to the efforts to eliminate the requirements that Pakistani passports state the bearer's religion.  In late 2005, Musharraf promised to move forward on the Kalabagh dam and other hydropower projects, but was forced to back down when he ran into a political resistance from Sindhi, Pushtun and Baloch politicians. Governance Fatigue ------------------  9. (C/NF) For reasons relating to the military's residual professional culture and its general disdain for politicians, pressure within the ranks to relinquish governance to civilian rule tends to rise over time. For example, two years ago, a Pakistani Major General opined that Pakistan's unique history and environment argued for some form of institutionalized involvement of the military in the country's political affairs.  Now, this same general privately refers to Musharraf as an isolated dictator and argues that civilian rule should be restored, albeit through a highly-manipulated election process that would place the \"best\" people into office.  This back-to-the-barracks phenomenon is one of several factors that have contributed to the cyclical ebb and flow of Pakistani political life. Leadership in Pakistan has rotated on a roughly ten year cycle, with the civilians in charge during the 1950's; the  ISLAMABAD 00019121  003 OF 003   military during the 60s; civilians for much of the 70s; the military in the 80s; civilians for most of the 90s; and the military, again, since 1999.  The Challenge for 2007 and Beyond ---------------------------------  10. (C/NF) This polarization between the civilians and the military has been the fundamental dynamic of Pakistani political life for 50-some years.  Both sides are clearly at fault.  The dysfunctionality of democratic institutions is largely due to the sustained interference of the military. However, civilian leaders have also done their part to justify the military's apprehensions and grievances.  The country manages to muddle along largely because this polarization has been tempered by family, clan and social ties that connect the elites.  The challenge now confronting Musharraf is much more complex than simply holding credible elections ) he must overcome this polarization to lay a foundation for stable and sustained democratic governance. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 13:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 019122  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2016 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS (2):  THE BASICS  REF: ISLAMABAD [1]  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable, the second in a series of cables mapping the political terrain as Pakistan approaches nationwide elections in 2007, reviews the fundamentals of the Pakistani electoral system, as well as possible time lines for the sequencing of provincial, federal and presidential elections.  Subsequent installments in this series will focus on the state-of-play within the parties and electorate, whether President/General Musharraf will shed his uniform, Musharraf's coalition options and recommendations on how the U.S. can best promote credible and open elections.  Basics 101:  Federal Parliament -------------------------------  2.  (U)  The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is governed by an elected bicameral federal parliament (Majlis-e-Shoora).  An electoral college consisting of the federal parliament and provincial assemblies indirectly elects the president.  The parliament consists of two houses:  the National Assembly and the Senate.  3.  (U)  The National Assembly has 342 seats:  272 are \"open\" seats (normally contested and filled by Muslims), ten are reserved for non-Muslims and 60 for women.  The President has the power to convene and dissolve the Assembly.  In addition to adopting legislation through majority vote, the Assembly's key powers are electing the Prime Minister and approving the federal budget.  In conjunction with the Senate, the Assembly has the power to approve amendments to the Constitution and to impeach the President; these actions require a 2/3 majority.  Although the Constitution provides for the Assembly to serve a five-year term, no Pakistani parliament has ever served for the full mandate.  The Assembly can be dissolved by the President on the advise of the Prime Minister or if the Prime Minister has lost a confidence vote by the Assembly and no other Assembly member appears able to form a government.  4. (U)  The Senate has 100 members, 88 of whom are indirectly elected by the provincial assemblies.  There are also four seats for Islamabad, which are elected by the National Assembly, and eight seats for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), who are elected by the 12 FATA members of the National Assembly.  Constitution envisions the Senate as a permanent body, with one-half of the members standing for election every three years.  (Note:  As an expanded Senate only came into being in 2003, the house held a one-time lottery in March 2007 to determine which senators would \"retire\" and have to run for re-election.  End note.) Although Senate approval is necessary for a bill to become law, the Senate wields less power than the Assembly.  For example, it has only an advisory role on the federal budget.  Basics 102:  The Presidency ---------------------------  5. (U)  Pakistan's constitution provide for indirect election of the President via an electoral college consisting of the members of the Senate, National Assembly and the four Provincial Assemblies.  Powers of the Presidency include dissolution of the National Assembly and convening the National Assembly and the Senate. The President appoints top military, judicial and administrative offices, as well as the governorships of the four provinces.  The President also has powers to pardon.  If the office of the President becomes vacant by reason of death, resignation or removal from office, the Chairman of the Senate and the Speaker of the National Assembly are the first and second in the line of succession.  ISLAMABAD 00019122  002 OF 003    6. (SBU)  After General Musharraf assumed power in October 1999, he enacted a series of laws amending the powers of the presidency and parliament, rescinding some constitutional provisions adopted during the regimes of General Zia, Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto.  On April 30, 2002, a national referendum was held on whether Pakistani citizens wished to \"elect President General Pervez Musharraf as president of Pakistan for five years?\"  The Chief Election Commissioner declared that more than 90 percent of voters favored Musharraf.  On August 21, 2002, Musharraf signed an executive order known as the Legal Framework Order (LFO).  The LFO amended the (pre-Zia) 1973 Constitution, restoring the President's power to dissolve the National Assembly, increasing the number of Assembly and Senate seats and establishing a National Security Council.   In December 2003, the parliament incorporated most provisions of the LFO into the Constitution via the 17th Amendment.  This amendment endorsed General Musharraf for a five year term as President and provided immunity for his official acts following his assumption of power in October 1999.  (Note:  In order to secure the support for the 17th Amendment from the Muttahida Majlis-e Ammal, the coalition of Islamic parties, Musharraf pledged to retire as Chief of Army Staff by the end of 2004. Key MMA leaders, particularly Jamaat-I Islami Amir Qazi Hussain Ahmed, consider the President's failure to honor this commitment an unforgivable political betrayal.  End note.)  7. (U)  The president's constitutional term of office is five years.  The starting date of President Musharraf's current term is a matter of debate:  legal analysts disagree as to whether his current five-year term started in May 2002 (the date Musharraf was sworn-in after the 2002 referendum) or December 2003 (the date Musharraf was affirmed by the electoral college).  8. (C)  The Constitution limits the President to two terms of office.  President Musharraf's legal advisors can plausibly argue that he is currently serving his first term as a constitutional president.  (Note: His official biography describes his civilian title/position before becoming President as \"Chief Executive.\" End note.)  Should Musharraf be re-elected for a second five-year term, he could remain in office until 2012-2013.   Although he has not made any definitive public announcement, Musharraf is widely assumed to want to serve another five-year term as President. Certainly the leadership of the governing Pakistan Muslim League (PML) has encouraged him to take this course and Musharraf has done nothing to dissuade them.  Basics 103:  The Provinces --------------------------  9.  (U)  Pakistan's four provinces are governed by popularly-elected provincial assemblies and governors appointed by the President.  Aside from their role in the electoral college that elects the federal President, the provincial assemblies are primarily focused on local matters.  They do not have true \"power of the purse\";  their role is limited to approving programatic and spending schemes prepared by the provincial government before they are presented to the center for approval.  10. (SBU)  The provincial assemblies' role in the electoral college has garnered increased attention recently, as opposition parties have signaled that they would resign from the National and Provincial Assemblies if President Musharraf were to seek early re-election, thus denying him the quorum needed convene the electoral college.  Currently, The opposition has the power to force the dissolution of only the NWFP Assembly, which would not be enough to block Musharraf's re-election, constitutionally or politically.   (Note: Federal Information Minister Durrani recently stated that even the dissolution of the both the Balochistan and NWFP  ISLAMABAD 00019122  003 OF 003   Assemblies would be no impediment to convening the electoral college.  End note.)  A show down over this issue, however, would alienate the opposition and poison the environment for a legitimate election.  Basics 104:  Electoral Calendar -------------------------------  11.  (U)  The current National Assembly was inaugurated on November 16, 2002; its mandate will expire on November 15, 2007.   The Constitution stipulates that National Assembly elections should take place within a 90-day window:  no earlier than 30 days before or 60 days after the Assembly's mandate expires.  This would place the date for National Assembly elections between December 16, 2007 and January 15, 2008.  12. (U)  As the Constitution requires that the Assembly be dissolved for 90 days before the election, post anticipates that the President would dissolve the Assembly sometime between September 17 and October 17, 2007.   Following the Assembly's dissolution, the president appoints a caretaker prime minister who, in turn, appoints a caretaker cabinet. Members of this interim cabinet are disqualified from contesting the election.  These provisions governing the National Assembly's timing, dissolution and caretaker leadership also apply to concurrent assembly elections in the provinces.  13. (C/NF)  Musharraf has long maintained that he wants the current National Assembly to complete its full five-year term.  Indeed, he views this as one of his credentials as a democrat, remarking frequently that the current Assembly will be the first in Pakistan's history to complete its full constitutional tenure.   There is spirited debate in Pakistani political circles on whether Musharraf should seek re-election from the sitting National Assembly or wait until a new Parliament is seated after National Assembly elections.  Opposition politicians, who view the current Assembly as stacked in Musharraf's favor, argue that re-election by the sitting members would be illegitimate.   The current Assembly is a known commodity and therefore perhaps the safer choice for a re-election vote, but some opposition parties have vowed to deny Musharraf a quorum by resigning their seat if he tries that route.  Delaying until a new Assembly is seated will raise the temperature of those elections, increasing the stakes and incentive for rigging.  Musharraf's decision will ultimately be a matter of political judgment; to date, post's interaction with his political advisors suggest that they remain divided on the best course of action.  The Supreme Court may be asked to rule on whether the election of the president will fall to the current or the future Assembly, but its credibility on such politically-charged matters is minimal. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD19121|06ISLAMABAD19122", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 13:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 019123  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2016 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS (3):  ELECTORATE AND PARTIES BOTH IN FLUX  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 19121      B. ISLAMABAD 19122  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C/NF)  Summary and introduction.  Pakistani voters have historically alternated between anti-incumbent backlashes and populist ground swells in which voters simply join the bandwagon of expected winners.  Which behavior prevails in the coming elections will depend on the ratio of anti-government sentiment to public perceptions that certain candidates/parties have unstoppable momentum.  Poll results suggest that the public is displeased with the government's performance, but unconvinced that the major opposition parties offer a viable alternative.  Given the volatility of Pakistan's coalition politics, it is too early to judge whether the government can maintain that edge between now and the elections.  International incidents, a deal between the GOP and one (or more) of the opposition parties, or the return of the country's exiled political leaders could each shift the balance of public sentiment for or against any of the mainstream parties...whether currently in power or not. In the end, the electorate's deeply-ingrained feudal loyalties, appetite for populist demagoguery and disinterest in issues-based campaigns may carry more weight in determining the make-up of Pakistan's next government than the politician's best-laid plans.  2.  (C)  This cable, the third in a series of cables mapping the political terrain as Pakistan approaches nationwide elections in 2007, assesses the historic behavior and current attitudes of Pakistani voters, as well as the muddy waters surrounding mainstream political parties and leaders. Subsequent installements in this series will focus on whether President/General Musharraf will shed his uniform, Musharraf's coalition options and recommendations on how the U.S. can best promote credible and open elections. End summary and introduction.   Throw the Bums Out or Jump on the Bandwagon? --------------------------------------------  3.  (C) Pakistanis are intensely politicized, alternating between a negative anti-incumbent impulses and a more pragmatic willingness to back whomever they judge to be the likely winning team.  Aitzaz Ahsan, an articulate Pakistan People's Party (PPP) insider currently out of favor with PPP leader Benazir Bhutto, explains the former in terms of the economic and social gap between those who govern and those who are governed.  He observes that, from election to election, ordinary Pakistanis routinely cope with run-of-the-mill government abuse: heavy-handed police, unresponsive utility representatives, corrupt judges, understaffed government hospitals and more.  Elections, according to Ahsan, provide an outlet for release, allowing the Pakistani people to throw the rascals out.  If the government has been particularly abusive, elections can be a period of unruly catharsis, as was the case following Zulfikhar Ali Bhutto's tenure as Prime Minister.  Ahsan points out that no civilian government in Pakistan's history has ever been re-elected.  If voters have a strong sense of alienation and pent-up frustration and feel the governing party (and President Musharraf) is vulnerable, public sentiment could turn against the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML), to the benefit of the PPP and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N).  4.  (C) Analysts have also detected a bandwagon effect: voters test the winds and vote for the candidate(s) they feel  ISLAMABAD 00019123  002 OF 004   has the best shot of success.  If voters feel the government already has the election sewn up or, more likely, that the opposition is weak and could do no better, they may save themselves the bother of Election Day analysis and simply vote for the ruling PML.   Too Early for Anyone to Have an Edge ------------------------------------  5.  (C) At this stage, however, none of the parties is in a position to alter the status quo and shift public opinion significantly in its favor.  The major secular opposition parties have been unable to articulate an agenda that addresses the genuine concerns of ordinary Pakistanis; each faces an uphill battle in overcoming their well-founded reputation for corruption and autocratic ruling styles.  Out of power for 7-10 years, the PPP and PML-N are weak and will continue to atrophy unless their exiled leaders return to rally their base; neither has demonstrated the ability or willingness to nurture vibrant new leaders.  Unrelenting cries for the exiles' return may simply prove the adages that absence make the heart grow fonder, while intimacy breeds contempt:  both Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto are known commodities to Pakistan voters.  Neither generates the ardent support they once enjoyed.  Indeed, if either returned to Pakistan, he/she would have to  account for his/her dismal record of governance, but without the buffer that distance now provides.  6. (C)  For their part, Musharraf and the PML government must grapple with the twin evils of inflation and unemployment, exacerbated by a weak party organization that lacks genuine grass-roots support.  Many who admire Musharraf and his goals despise the current leadership of his party, the Chaudhary family, viewing it as corrupt, power-hungry, and opposed to genuine reform.  Amongst Pakistan's elite, post rarely encounters vocal supporters of Musharraf or the PML government.  The Prime Minister and other officials are currently dodging accusations of corruption following a series of questionable privatization deals and stock market scandals.  Another irritant is the perception of growing institutional corruption by the military and military-affiliated industrial conglomerates, which is increasingly encroaching on the civilian economy, crowding out employment and commercial opportunities.  Polling data highlights regional cleavages that the PML leaders have yet to address:  the party has virtually no support in the provinces of NWFP and Balochistan.   A Divided (or Befuddled) Electorate -----------------------------------  7.  (C)  Unless either the PML or the secular opposition parties can dramatically alter these negative perceptions over the next year, none can claim a lock on electoral support in 2007/8.  Polls confirm the anecdotal evidence of a divided electorate, unenthused about any party or individual.  A recent International Republican Insitute (IRI) survey, which used internationally accepted statistical sampling to conduct a nationwide poll between May and June, illustrates a crazy quilt pattern of public opinion:  for example, while sixty percent of respondents claimed to approve of Musharraf's performance, only 28 percent identified Musharraf as the most suitable leader to handle Pakistan's problems; the President was followed closely by Benazir Bhutto at 23 percent, and Nawaz Sharif at 16 percent.  When asked about democratization and current GOP policies, some 35 percent of voters consistently provided answers favorable to President Musharraf.  Prime Minister Aziz had a job approval rating of  ISLAMABAD 00019123  003 OF 004   54 percent, but only 15 percent consider him the best candidate for Prime Minister.  Eighteen percent opted Benazir Bhutto, 13 percent for Nawaz Sharif, and 5 percent for Musharraf.  8.  (C)  The personal popularity of Musharraf and Shaukat Aziz does not translate into strong support for the PML government:  only 37 percent stated that the current coalition had done a good job and deserved reelection.  When asked which party would best handle Pakistan's problems, 28 percent supported the PML, 22 percent the PPP and 16 percent the PML-N.  The parties' favorability ratings were even closer:  23 percent favoring PML, 22 percent the PPP and 16 percent the PML-N.  These results broadly track with previous findings that confirm Musharraf as Pakistan's most favored political leader (followed by Benazir), but within a closely-divided electorate.  A private UK poll conducted in January 2006 found that out of a field of eleven, 24 percent favored Musharraf, 16 percent favored Benazir and 11 percent favored Nawaz.  (Note:  Surveys consistently show the Islamist parties cumulatively polling in the mid-single digits.  End note.)   Rx:  TCL for Voters, A Shot of Adrenaline for the Parties --------------------------------------------- ------------  9.  (C)  PPP/Aitzaz Ahsan notes that Pakistani politicians cannot assume that polling results will accurately predict actual voter behavior, as voting in many regions -- both rural and urban -- often requires arduous commitment by civic-minded Pakistanis and commensurate support from political parties.  For example, Ahsan recalled that in 1988, the PPP base was so passionate in its support for Benazir that the party did not need external inducements to get its voters to the polls.  In contrast, Ahsan says, the party must now arrange transportation and compensation for voters' opportunity costs (e.g., lost wages, food in place of home-cooked meals, etc.).  The PML faces the same challenges, but carries the institutional advantages that fall to the incumbent.  10.  (C) Absent significant change -- in electoral tactics by the parties, new electoral coalitions, an outside shock to the system, or outright electoral fraud -- no party is currently positioned to  achieve an outright majority in the upcoming poll.  National sentiment is now divided between the three large secular parties, but with significant numbers of voters supporting smaller regional groupings.  The advantages of incumbency and Musharraf's generally favorable approval rating may help the PML achieve a plurality (a feat it did not achieve even in the heavily rigged 2002 elections), but brash PML predictions of a landslide victory are unfounded. With the elections not likely for another twelve months, there is ample time for the party's mushy polling number to solidify...or soften further; the only certainty is that its future as the ruling party is far from assured.  Similarly, the PPP and PML-N face an uphill battle in energizing their voters and overcoming the parties' strongly perceived negatives; their present strategy of waiting for public sentiment to shift against Musharraf will only lead to their failure.   Populism, Feudalism and Price Hikes ----------------------------------- 11. (C/NF)  Even a casual observer of the Pakistani political scene is struck by dearth of policy analysis (or awareness) amongst party leaders and workers; the proclivity of senior political leaders to nurture personality cults within their parties at the expense of positive issue-based campaign  ISLAMABAD 00019123  004 OF 004   strategies; and the receptivity of the masses to demagogic denunciations of price hikes in basic commodities and emotional appeals to bruised national pride.  A year out from elections, with the electorate in a muddle and the parties' strategies in flux, we should not be surprised if the 2007 campaign devolves to the lowest common denominator -- mud-slinging, appeals to patriotic fervor and glorification of the parties' iconic figurehead -- with little considered debate on the internal challenges and external relationships that will determine Pakistan's future. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD19121|06ISLAMABAD19122|06ISLAMABAD19123", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 13:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 019124  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/26/2016 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS (4):  THE UNIFORM  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 19121      B. ISLAMABAD 19122      C. ISLAMABAD 19123  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  This cable, the fourth in a series mapping the political terrain as Pakistan approaches nationwide elections in 2007, reviews a uniquely Pakistani issues that will color the run-up to presidential, provincial and federal parliamentary elections:  whether President Musharraf will relinquish his post as Chief of Army Staff before seeking re-election as President.  Subsequent installments will consider Musharraf's coalition options and recommendations for U.S. assistance and political support for credible and open elections.  2.  (C)  To the dismay of most Pakistani democracy activists and opposition politicians, for seven years, Pervez Musharraf has remained Chief of Army Staff (COAS) while serving as Pakistan's Chief Executive and President.  Whether Musharraf must retire from the Army before seeking re-election as President is a frequent topic of debate by Pakistan's intelligentsia, as \"the uniform\" symbolizes both Musharraf's core source of power and the military's recurrent domination of the Pakistani body politic.  3.  (C)  Many Pakistani political analysts believe that Musharraf is constitutionally barred both from (a) continuing to serve concurrently as COAS and President beyond 2007 and (b) seeking re-election to another term as President.  The first interpretation stems from the 17th Amendment to Pakistan's Constitution, which specifically extended the time that Musharraf may hold both offices until 2007.  The second rests upon a constitutional prohibition against Army officers serving as elected federal officials until two years after retiring from military service.  4.  (C)  Attorney General Makhdoom Ali Khan and other GOP legal minds have offered alternative readings of the Constitutional imperatives and prohibitions; not surprisingly, their readings have not persuaded Musharraf's opponents.  A case now pending before the Supreme Court may lead to a ruling on the uniform issue, but the Court will be subject to intense pressure to rule in favor of the President.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) could bypass the Supreme Court and extend Musharraf's dual office role through legislation.  It would be difficult for the government to pass a constitutional amendment to surmount barriers to Musharraf serving another term as president, given its slim majority; privately, however, leaders of the PPP and PML-N have indicated significant flexibility on this issue if Musharraf retires as COAS.  5.  (C)  Conversations with presidential advisors and family members lead post to conclude that Musharraf is inclined to relinquish his Army billet.  Senator Mushahid Hussain Sayed, Secretary General of the governing Pakistan Muslim League  SIPDIS (PML), has told post that Musharraf sought his counsel more than a year ago on what is locally known as the \"uniform issue.\"  Hussain prepared a  two-page written recommendation for Musharraf's personal review.  The President subsequently called Hussain to an intimate meeting joined by National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz, whom the President had separately tasked to draft his own a two-page paper. According to Hussein, Musharraf said that he was uncertain about the best way forward:  even his family was divided on the issue, with his daughter telling him to take off the uniform, his son urging him to keep it.  As it turned out, both Hussein and Aziz gave him the same advice: the uniform should go.  6.  (C)  Whatever his private inclinations, whether Musharraf  ISLAMABAD 00019124  002 OF 002   retires as COAS will depend on political developments over the next year.  Post expects that he will defer this decision until late in the process, possibly after parliamentary elections, to avoid becoming a lame duck in the interim and creating an potentially unstable political environment. Given the concentration of power in the Office of the President over the recent years, even without his uniform, President Musharraf would retain far more power and influence than any of his civilian predecessors.     BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD19121|06ISLAMABAD19122|06ISLAMABAD19123|06ISLAMABAD19124|06ISLAMABAD19125", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 13:26", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 019125  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2016 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS (5):  MUSHARRAF'S COALITION OPTIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 19121      B. ISLAMABAD 19122      C. ISLAMABAD 19123      D. ISLAMABAD 19124  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary and introduction:  Pervez Musharraf has three options for ensuring a solid political foundation for his moderate and progressive agenda as he prepares for 2007 elections.  He can stand by the present Pakistan Muslim League (PML) coalition and leadership; stick with the PML, but ditch its current leadership; or build a new coalition that includes mainstream oppostion parties the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and perhaps the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N).  While the latter would be the most compatible with Musharraf's agenda, it entails the greatest risk, including the possible return of exiled PPP and PML-N leaders.  2.  (C)  This cable, the fifth in a series mapping the political terrain as Pakistan approaches nationwide elections in 2007, assess President Musharraf's policy goals and political options.  The final installment in the series will outline post's recommendations on how the U.S, can best support credible elections in 2007 and stable governance thereafter.  End summary and introduction.  3. (C/NF) Setting aside his personal ambitions, as President Musharraf looks to the 2007 elections and beyond,  his fundamental objective is ensuring the political stability necssary to continue sound and progressive government policies.  Musharraf's priorities have not signficantly changed since his first address to the nation after taking power in October 1999: good governance, sound economic management, improved relations with India and an end to corruption and Islamic extremism.  (Note: Musharraf would likely now add success in the GWOT and extending the writ of state to Balochistan and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) to his list.  End note.)  Musharraf has pursued these objectives with evident sincerity, but varying degrees of success. A bitterly contested, venomous election cycle would lead to post-election instability that would threaten progress on all fronts.  This is undoubtedly a significant consideration for Musharraf as he considers his options, including the direct participation of Pakistan's exiled opposition party leaders.  4. (C/NF) Musharraf can, of course, stay the course.  Under this scenario, Musharraf would stand by the PML, its current leadership and the existing coalition.  The PML would expand its electoral base to capture what Musharraf has described as a \"big thumping victory\" in 2007.  This is a highly optimistic scenario, as the current PML leadership -- Chaudhary Shujaat Hussein, who leads the party in the National Assembly, and his cousin, Punjab Chief Minister Chaudhary Pervez Elahi  -- are widely seen as corrupt and autocratic; both are unpopular even within their own party. More importantly, the Chaudharies do not share Musharraf's progressive inclinations.  Alternatively, Musharraf could conceivably stick with the PML, but with new party leadership.  Although there has been much speculation over this option in the last six months, many observers have discounted it as increasingly unlikely as elction day approaches.  Whatever their faults, the Chaudharies are undeniably ruthlessly effective ward-style politicians.  5. (C/NF) Musharraf could also seek an accommodation with the mainstream secular parties headed by Benazir Bhutto (Pakistan People's Party - PPP) and Nawaz Sharif (Pakistan Muslim  ISLAMABAD 00019125  002 OF 003   League-Nawaz - PML-N).  There is much to be said for this option -- especially as it relates to the PPP and Pakistan's smaller regional parties, such as the MQM and Awami National Party -- as it would unite Pakistan's  moderate forces in a post-election coalition, providing  a stable political base for progressive policies.  The risk Musharraf faces would be high however, as the price of a coalition could be opening the door to the exiled leaders to return to Pakistan to lead their parties' campaigns.  Musharraf has a strong personal antipathy to both leaders, with particular disdain for Nawaz Sharif; he views both as unalterably corrupt and blames them for gross mismanagement during their administrations in the 1990s.  From Musharraf's perspective, Benazir and Nawaz have had their chance to lead...and they failed.  It was with these two in mind that Musharraf included a term-limit clause in a 2003 Constitutional amendment -- a clause that would need to be annulled if Nawaz or Benazir is ever to serve as Prime Minister again.  In the case of Nawaz, there is also considerable tension relating to the circumstances of his ouster in 1999, with Musharraf blaming Nawaz for putting his life at risk and Nawaz blaming Musharraf for the subsequent coup.  6. (C/NF) The PML-N poses a serious threat to Chaudharies and the ruling PML, as it has a strong base in the Punjab and represents similar constituencies.  A senior PML-N insider confirmed to poloffs that his party has continues to discuss possible pre- and post-election arragements with government and Musharraf representatives, even as it considers an alternative alliance with the coalition of Islamic parties, the Muttahida Majlis-e Ammal (MMA), to bring the PML government down and force early elections.  (add para from lahore)  7. (C/NF) Of the PPP and PML-N, the PPP is either Musharraf's greater electoral threat or, conversely, his most lucrative coalition partner, as the party retains a national base and populist appeal.  Musharraf would have good reason to fear that if the PPP has a strong showing at the polls, an emboldened Benazir could very well turn on him. Musharraf has had feelers out to the PPP for many years, hoping to entice Benazir into a deal akin to his pact with the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM), wherein Benazir would lead her party from abroad but the party would participate in governance: joining the coalition, taking seats in the Cabinet and leading the Sindh Government. PPP insiders have told post that one iteration of this offer would permit Benazir to return to Pakistan after an undefined period following the 2007 election, possibly taking a Senate seat in a by-election.  A key sticking point has been Benazir's insistence that pending corruption charges in domestic and international courts be stayed -- something that may not be within the GOP's power to guarantee with respect to cases pending in Switzerland and Spain. (Note:  A senior PPP figure has told us that Benazir believes she is also positioned to press the United States to help her escape from her legal entanglements.  End note.)  Benazir's intransigence has dismayed many party members, who fear that the party faces severe electoral challenges absent a deal with the GOP.  8.  (C/NF) Musharraf will find it difficult to reach an agreement with the exiled leaders if they continue to make such a deal contingent on their return to Pakistan in advance of elections - although both have recently expressed some flexibility on this point.  Musharraf has every reason to expect that, even if a deal is struck, the exiled leaders would still campaign on an anti-Musharraf, anti-Army platform.  Under a worst-case scenario, they could generate precisely the kind of pre-election unrest that he hopes to avoid.   ISLAMABAD 00019125  003 OF 003   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD19121|06ISLAMABAD19122|06ISLAMABAD19123|06ISLAMABAD19124|06ISLAMABAD19125|06ISLAMABAD19126", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2006 13:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 019126  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2016 TAGS: KDEM, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS (6):  THE U.S. ROLE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 19121      B. ISLAMABAD 19122      C. ISLAMABAD 19123      D. ISLAMABAD 19124      E. ISLAMABAD 19125  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C/NF)  Summary and introduction:  The U.S. casts an outsized shadow over Pakistani domestic politics; with the onset of these elections, we have an opportunity to nudge Pakistan toward a stable and sustainable democratic order. Throughout the coming year, we should confirm our support for a fair electoral contest, continue strengthening democratic institutions, encourage Musharraf and the moderate parties to continue talking (without posing as a deal-broker ourselves) and privately be clear with Musharraf about our long-term expectations.  Throughout, we must temper our public remarks to avoid having our words distorted and used as weapons in domestic political battles.  2.  (C)  This is the final cable in a series mapping the political terrain in advance of Pakistan's nationwide elections in 2007.  In the months ahead, post will track possible pre- and post-election alliances, monitor the parties' campaign strategies and assess emerging trends and issues that resonate with the electorate.  End summary and introduction.  Decision Point 2007 -------------------  3. (C/NF)  Pakistan is a critical front in the war on terror, both in the near war and the long.  It has a strong record as a partner today, but victory in the long war will depend on Pakistan's evolution into a progressive, stable and democratic partner. Post is convinced that Musharraf shares this long-term objective, although his progress to date has been slow and halting.  If he succeeds, Pakistan has the potential to be a significant force for moderation in the Muslem world as an all-too-rare example of a pluralistic, democratic Muslim state.  The upcoming elections loom as a potential watershed for Pakistan; we have a strong interest in both encouraging credible elections and in helping Pakistan achieve a new, stable, less-polarized democratic order after the elections.   Building a Foundation for Credible Elections --------------------------------------------  4. (C/NF)  Laying the groundwork for legitimate elections in 2007, post has successfully encouraged the appointment of an empowered and independent Chief Election Commissioner.  USAID is working to help build the capacity of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) to develop new voter rolls and prepare procedures to help protect the integrity of the polling process.  We must continue to press all parties to work with the ECP to resolve outstanding issues and design an electoral framework acceptable to all sides; without such a consensus, the parties will lapse into questioning the legitimacy of the vote, regardless of the ultimate conduct of the polls.  Additional support for election observation and strengthening the ECP is required. The latter should be contingent on the commitment by both the GOP and ECP to fair elections.  The U.S. has put Musharraf and other PML leaders on notice that we expect these elections to be a qualitative improvement over those of the past.  This is a message we should underscore -- privately -- with Musharraf at every opportunity.  These elections will not be perfect, but we can work to ensure that they represent a recognizable step  ISLAMABAD 00019126  002 OF 002   forward.  5. (C/NF)  As to helping Pakistan achieve a more stable, less-polarized democratic order, a well-managed election that the perceived by the public as fair and credible is the first step toward promoting post-election stability, precluding the unrest that follows blatant rigging.  Beyond this, we should also encourage moderate parties -- the PPP, the MQM and the ANP - to work constructively with the President and the government. Most importantly, we must continue our private dialogue with Musharraf, making clear our expectation that he empower civilian institutions and relinquish his military role in accordance with current constitutional requirements.  Stepping Up to Play a Constructive Role ---------------------------------------  6. (C/NF)  The PPP can play a critical role.  Although an accommodation between Benazir and Musharraf is the most desirable outcome, it must be worked out without external mediators.  Each knows what the other brings to the table. U.S. interests and Pakistani interests would be served by disabusing Benazir of any hope that the U.S. will enter the negotiation and force Musharraf to accept her terms.  Even if it were possible for a third party to broker a deal, outside intervention would retard a genuine sense of shared interest, thereby undermining the desired  post-election stability.  A failed third-party attempt to intercede could back-fire, leading to a rancorous and polarizing electoral contest and a winner-take-all post-election environment.  7. (C/NF) If Musharraf and Benazir do not reach a pre-election arrangement, we will face a closely-divided parliament following the 2007 election, in which coalition government would be the order of the day.  The USG will need to encourage all progressive elements to stand together in order to build a strong, workable government.  If Musharraf and Benazir fail to cut a pre-election deal or reach a post-election accommodation and the PPP remains outside the tent, Pakistan will have lost the chance for a truly progressive government - and Musharraf will have significantly greater challenges to lead the country on a steadily moderate course.  Engineering a Soft Landing --------------------------  8. (C/NF) There is a prospect for a soft landing after eight years of military-led government -- a first in Pakistan's history.  With a fresh legislature enjoying new-found legitimacy, Musharraf as a purely civilian president, a military that has inched back from the political arena -- and a new degree of comity among the three -- Pakistan may at last turn a page on its dysfunctional and polarized political history.  The U.S. has an important role to play in this drama: encouraging a fair electoral contest; building the capacity of democratic institutions; encouraging Musharraf and the moderate parties to continue talking (without posing as a deal-broker ourselves); and being clear with Musharraf in private about our long-term expectations. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/28/2006 10:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 019152  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, MOPS, PTER SUBJECT: NORTH WAZIRISTAN INCIDENTS UPDATE  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  The following list of incidents reported in the local press appear to violate the North Waziristan Agency (NWA) Jirga Agreement which  tribal leaders and the GOP signed on  September 5.  The list has been culled from local press reporting and contacts in the area.  According to our contacts, the GOP has honored its commitments, particularly making the Pak-Mil less visible in the Agency, though the GOP continues to stress that the total number of Pak-Mil troops in NWA has not changed.  2.  (SBU)  Tribal Commitment:  Ensure no attacks on GOP installations or personnel:  --On September 14, unknown persons kidnapped a government employee working for rural development in Khadi village near the town of Mirali.  The person's whereabouts are still unknown.  3.  (SBU)  Tribal Commitment:  Ensure no targetted killings  --Two moderate tribal elders have been assasinated since September 5:  One on September 9 in Miranshah and one on September 21 near a checkpoint two kilometers from Miranshah.  4.  (C)  Tribal Commitment:  No Parallel (i.e. Taliban) Administration:  --According to press reports and Embassy contacts, followers of Maulana Sadiq Noor patrol the streets of some small towns and villages meeting out punishments for \"crimes\" like watching \"vulgar\" movies or smoking hashish.  One Embassy contact reports that Taliban \"law enforcers\" are increasingly visible in NWA.  5.  (C)  Tribal Commitment:  Ensure No Cross-Border Infiltration to Fight Coalition or Afghan Forces:  --The bodies of five Taliban militia fighters were returned from Afghanistan to Miranshah September 20.  GOP officials said the deceased may have been killed in a gunbattle with Coalition forces in Afghanistan.  One of the dead men, Maulana Abdul Kalam, had been part of the Jirga negotiating process and apparently crossed the border into Afghanistan at about the time the agreement was signed.  --Local journalists tell the Embassy that cross border activity has not stopped, but that the inifiltrators remain in Afghanistan for a lengthy enough period so that, upon their return to NWA, they cannot be tied to specific anti-coalition attacks.  6.  (C)  Comment:  While the above incidents are troubling, it is still too early to judge trend lines.  Post will continue to monitor reports from NWA and will report them to the Department bi-weekly. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16962|06ISLAMABAD17875|06ISLAMABAD18929", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/2/2006 6:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 019193  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/25/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, PK SUBJECT: BALOCHISTAN: UNQUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 17875 AND PREVIOUS      B. ISLAMABAD 16962      C. ISLAMABAD 18929  Classified By: CDA Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and(d).  1.  SUMMARY: (C) Four weeks after the event, the death of Nawab Bugti has become a rallying point for the Baloch rights movement, which is shifting from \"fair treatment within Pakistan\" rhetoric to talk of independence.  Protests and attacks against symbols of the central government continue, as does political organization by Baloch nationalists.   The first grand jirga of the Baloch in over a century condemned the Bugti's death and the way the central government has shortchanged the province.  Army plans to establish new cantonments and the continued persecution, even disappearance, of those the government labels \"terrorists\" are not helping to calm the situation.  END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Balochistan is entering another cycle of protest against Punjabi immigrants, the Army and central rule.  For the fourth time since Pakistan's independence, \"nationalists\" in the province are engaged in attacks on symbols of their \"colonial status\" in Pakistan.  The Army's aggressive role in the August 26 death and subsequent burial of Nawab Bugti, one of the major \"sardars\" (tribal lords) of the Baloch (ref A) have given Baloch nationalists a potent icon.  3. (C)  The government appears of two minds, political and military, in dealing with the rising tide of Baloch nationalism.  Politicians such as Senator Mushahid Hussain Syed (Secretary General of the PML-Q) and Senate Chairman Mohammedmian Soomro call for conciliation and programs to give the Baloch a leg up in the development of the province. In late September, President Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz seperately announced development projects for the districts of Dera Bugti and Kohlu alone totaling over USD 400 million.  At the same time, a growing Army presence in Sui, Dera Bugti and Kohlu is enforcing a hardline \"writ of the state.\"  There is also talk of building  new cantonments to bring more parts of the province under the Army's control.  Grand Jirga Trumps Tribal Jirga ---------------------------------------- 4. (U) On September 21, the Khan of Kalat, the traditional hereditary leader of most Baloch tribes, presided over a grand jirga (conclave) of 85 tribal chiefs and several hundred elders.  The grand jirga was in response to a government-managed Bugti tribal jirga held two days before the August 26 death of Nawab Bugti, in which pro-goverment Bugti tribesmen declared the demise of the sardari (tribal lord) system in the Bugti tribal area.  It declared Nawab Bugti's heirs the legitimate owners of his property, a direct challenge to the Army, which, according to contacts in Quetta, continues to distribute parcels of the Nawab's lands to his tribal opponents.  The jirga called upon the International Human Rights Commission to investigate Bugti's death.  5.  (C) The Khan's grand jirga registered a province-wide protest against the way the government had dealt with the Nawab Bugti.  The overarching reason for holding Balochistan,s first grand jirga in over one hundred years was to vent Baloch outrage over \"colonial occupation\" of their land by Punjabi immigrants (estimated to number 400,000) and the Punjabi-dominated Army.  The jirga also rejected GOP-planned mega-projects, such as the Gwadar port scheme which many Baloch say benefit only outsiders.   In a gesture designed more for publicity than effect, the jirga also called for the International Court of Justice to investigate government violation of the agreement signed by the state of Kalat, the British crown and the government of Pakistan concerning the rights of the Baloch people.  A Quetta-based contact in attendance reported that in this referral to the ICJ was also an attempt by the jirga to placate many in the audience who wanted to declare  ISLAMABAD 00019193  002 OF 002   independence from Pakistan.  6. (C)  The grand jirga characterized on-going military operations (raids, arrests, \"disappearances,\" heavy handed responses to nationalist sabotage of infrastructure) as \"state terrorism\" and called for the release of political workers held in custody.  The degree of Baloch disenchantment with the central government, and the potential for further discord, was underlined by a former Chief Minister of Balochistan,  Nawab Zulfiqar Ali Magsi, who noted that once \"we had taken oath as governors, chief ministers and ministers on the Constitution that we are now opposing.\"  Reports of Disappearances ---------------------------------- 7.  (C) The call for the release of \"political workers\" in GOP custody gives voice to a growing complaint in Balochistan and neighboring Sindh.  Human Rights Watch and the Asian Human Rights Commission have noted that both provinces are experiencing a growing number of \"disappearances.\"  Posts has read reports of the disappearance of political activists, their family members and others deemed \"problematic\" by the police, army or other agencies.  In both provinces, the bulk of those \"missing\" appear to be ethnic Baloch.  Human Rights Watch and journalists report that families are being left in the dark regarding the fate of the missing.  (Note: HRW and other contacts advise post that GOP security agencies often quietly send word to the family of a missing person that their loved one is in custody -- a courtesy not/not now being extended to the families of missing Baloch.  End note.)  The government denies complicity in most of these disappearances and has been quick to characterize those who protest for provincial rights as supporting \"terrorism.\" (Ref C).  8. (C) Comment:  The Khan of Kalat's jirga represents, for the first time in recent history, a large number of tribal elders who are voicing sentiments usually articulated by groups such as the Baloch Student Organization and more actively militant nationalists.  Unanswered questions regarding Nawab Bugti's death at the hands of the Army, hard line rhetoric about extending \"the writ of the state,\" and continued disappearance of those who fall afoul of the authorities do nothing to placate the animosity against the federal government.  Balochistan's isolation and alienation from the center still must be addressed.  End comment.  10.  (U) Consulate Karachi contributed to this report. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17768|06ISLAMABAD17992", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/2/2006 10:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 019208  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: MASS, MCAP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: F-16 LOA SIGNED AT LAST.  REF: A.) ISLAMABAD 017768 B.) ISLAMABAD 017992  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  MG  Tariq Salim Malik, Additional Secretary of Ministry of Defense Production (MODP), signed the Letter of Acceptance (LOA) to purchase 18 F-16s Saturday evening, September 30.  Following the private signing ceremony, MODP presented to Office of Defense Representative Pakistan a side memo, the text of which is printed in paragraph 3.  2.  (C)  Comment: We consider the memo to be separate from the LOA, which constitutes a valid legal contract.  Many of the issues raised in the memo were addressed and resolved in President Musharraf's Washington D.C. meetings with President Bush, Secretary Rumsfeld, and other USG principals.  In preparing a response, post encourages USG agencies to include references to the understandings regarding the F-16 LOA that came out of those Washington meetings.    End Comment.  3.  (SBU)  Text of the September 30 momo:  (Begin Text)  RESTRICTED  IMMEDIATE Ministry of Defence Production Directorate General Defence Purchase Pakistan Secretariat  II, Rawalpindi Telephone:  9270924 No. 1367/F-16 pkg/DGDP/FMS  30 Sep 2006   To:   ODRP ---        US Embassy, --         Islamabad  Copy to:    DSCA --                     1111 Jefferson Davis HWY --                      Arlington, VA-22202  Subject:    Signing of F-16 LOAs  1.    All the three F-16 Package LOAs (PK-D-SAF, PK-D-NAP, PK-D-YAD) are being signed subject to the following conditions: -  a.    On the method and schedule of payments we request that Pakistan Be allowed to avail clause 4.4.6 of the LOA Standard Terms and conditions; which allows payment on delivery rather cash prior to deliver.  If this is absolutely impossible then we suggest as an alternative, that the schedule of payments be modified.  Under the existing schedule for the 3 LOAs, out of the total package of $2965.95 million, 83% or $2450.23 million are to be paid by 2009-10, the first four years of the programme.  This schedule will be an immense strain on Pakistan,s fiscal and foreign exchange resources, posing sever constraints on Pakistan,s ability to invest in the social and fiscal infrastructure.  This will jeopardize Pakistan,s growth and poverty alleviation prospects in a particularly challenging period.  We, therefore, request that the payment schedule be back loaded in a manner that most of the payments fall in the last three years of the programme.  b.    If during the contract process and delivery schedule of items in the LOAs, delivery is stopped for any reason, complete payments for the undelivered stores will be returned to the Govt of Pakistan immediately without pre-conditions.  c.    Security:   With respect to the security note 64 to LOA PK-D-SAF Note 58 of LOA PK-D-YAD and note 73 of LOA PK-D-NAP, it is opined that whereas GOP agrees to take effective measures to protect all US equipment in Pakistan including F-16 aircraft, AMRAAMS, hardware and technical data, it is considered that certain aspects of these notes and their sub clauses are the forte and responsibility of the GOP.  These security notes therefore need further deliberation and rationalization.  It is requested that discussion for the same may be initiated at the earliest between the two sides.  d.    LOAs are being signed.  Confirmation will however be subject to approval by the Federal Cabinet of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  ISLAMABAD 00019208  002 OF 002    2.    As an ally that throughout its existence has always stood by the US, whatever the challenges and risks, Pakistan expects that its difficulties will be appreciated and the US Government will respond positively.   /s/ Maj Gen Additional Secretary (DP) (Tariq Salim Malik)  (End Text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/10/2006 9:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 019795  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL, MOPS, PTER, AF SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S OCT 5 MEETING WITH 11TH CORPS COMMANDER   Classified By: Charge d'Affiares Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  Summary -------  1. (U) Ambassador met with 11th Corps Commander (Peshawar) LTG Mohammad Hamid Khan on October 5.  ODRP Chief MG Helmly, Islamabad DATT, and Peshawar PO (notetaker) were also present.  Meetings with NWFP Governor Orakzai and FATA Additional Chief Secretary Arbab reported septels.  2. (C) The 11th Corps Commander told Ambassador that the Army is concentrating its forces on the border with the Frontier Corps (FC) taking responsibility for North Waziristan Agency (NWA) interior posts.  This would place additional 4000 regular army troops along the border. Hamid warned, however, that instability in the tribal areas ultimately required a political solution.  The General recommended establishing a communication link between posts on either side of the border via wireless radio.  He also suggested a flag meeting between posts covering the Chitral/Kunar area.  Hamid expressed great concern about the growing number of attacks around Kandahar. President Karzai, he said, should engage more closely and regularly with local Pathan leaders.  End Summary.  Assessing the Border and the NWA Agreement ------------------------------------------  3. (C) Ambassador opened the meeting by noting strong U.S. support for President Musharraf, particularly as a partner in stabilizing the border areas with Afghanistan.  All parties, he said, had a stake in the success of the NWA peace agreement.  The U.S. side, Ambassador continued, was ready to provide an assessment of problem areas along the border and to discuss how to improve communications.  What we have seen thus far is a continuation of militant activity trough September at the same level as August, which was very high. Ambassador asked for the General's perspective one month into the NWA peace deal.  4. (C) The NWA agreement, Hamid replied, had helped the military concentrate its forces on the border.  The General attributed the upswing in activity on the border to two causes.  First, autumn is traditionally a period when \"operations\" escalate before winter conditions impede movement.  Second, U.S. forces were on the border and presented an attractive target.  The General carefully stated that he was not denying the possibility of cross-border filtration from Pakistan.  Instead, he continued, it was simply important to recognize that \"miscreants\" from both sides of the border were gravitating toward U.S. forces.  The Pakistani army, Hamid said, had stepped up border patrolling along NWA, South Waziristan Agency (SWA), and Chitral.  There had been an agreement with Bagram, he pointed out, for synchronized patrolling, but the Pakistani side needed timing information to be effective.  5. (C) Reviewing the NWA situation in the run up to the September agreement, Hamid described January to June in 2006 as \"very intense.\"  Mounting casualties among militants, the General remarked, had contributed to bringing tribal leaders to the table.  Hamid viewed the commitments from NWA tribal leaders in the September agreement as \"genuine.\"  He understood that if the deal fails greater pressure will fall on Pakistani forces to take action.  Hamid warned, however, that instability in the tribal areas could not be solved solely through military measures.  The army, the General maintained, could only contribute to setting the scene for what was truly required -- a political solution.  ISLAMABAD 00019795  002 OF 002    6. (C) With the army concentrating on the border, Ambassador asked about security inside NWA.  Hamid responded that the FC was continuing to man NWA interior posts.  The option of additional FC troops for interior duty was under consideration, he added.  Shoring Up Counter-Insurgency Capabilities ------------------------------------------  7. (C) MG Helmly briefed on ODRP's ongoing assessment of Pakistani counter-insurgency needs.  He asked how the U.S. military could improve information exchange and night-time operations.  Hamid noted that while border posts are able to communicate with Bagram, there is no communication link with posts on the Afghan side of the border.  The General proposed using wireless sets as a solution.  MG Helmly noted that the fielding of Harris radios was now complete on the Paksitan side, which should improve communications.  Responding to MG Helmly's concern over large groups of fighters moving across the border from Chitral, Hamid recommended a flag meeting between posts in the Chitral/Kunar area.  Addressing Rising Violence in Afghanistan -----------------------------------------  8. (C) MG Helmly noted that the next Tripartite Commission meeting in late October would take a broad look at the rising violence in Afghanistan.  Hamid acknowledged that incidents on the border were cause for concern but viewed them primarily as a distraction.  The attacks around Kandahar, he continued, were more to the point of the Taliban's larger goal -- re-establishing a permanent foothold in Afghanistan. Hamid argued that President Karzai should expand his political influence with Pathans by holding more regular loya jirgas with local leaders.  (Comment:  Hamid did not express an opinion on the proposal for cross-border loya jirgas. NWFP Governor Orakzai has told us separately that he will be the point man on this proposal.  End Comment.) BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD19152", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/10/2006 10:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 019796  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2016 TAGS: PTER, EAID, PINR, PK, PREL, SNAR, AF SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S OCT 5 MEETING WITH NWFP GOV. ORAKZAI  REF: ISLAMABAD 19152  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  Summary -------  1. (U) Ambassador met with North West Frontier Province (NWFP) Governor Ali Muhammad Jan Orakzai on October 5. Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) Secretariat Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) Shehzad Arbab, Secretary to the Governor Azmat Orakzai, ODRP Chief MG Helmly, Islamabad DATT, and Peshawar PO (notetaker) were also present. Meetings with 11th Corps Commander LTG Hamid and Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) Arbab reported septels.  2. (C) Orakzai expressed determination to enforce the North Waziristan Agency (NWA) peace agreement but cautioned that there will be \"hiccups\" along the way.  While no punishments have been handed down yet, the Governor noted that tribal elders and local officials have significant enforcement tools to draw on.  Orakzai emphasized the need for \"real time\" intelligence to allow Pakistani forces to act quickly on the border, particularly with the start of patrolling between posts.  The Governor welcomed ODRP plans to upgrade the Army and Frontier Corps' (FC) capabilities.  ACS Arbab reported that a comprehensive FATA strategy should be completed by the end of October.  Ambassador emphasized the importance of making a push to reduce poppy cultivation in the FATA and NWFP.  End Summary.  Enforcing the NWA Agreement ---------------------------  3. (C) Governor Orakzai opened the meeting by emphasizing the importance of the NWA peace agreement.  The success or failure of the agreement, he said, affects not just Pakistan but the Coalition and the collective effort to combat terrorism.  There may be \"hiccups,\" the Governor cautioned. \"What we have attempted to solve by military means we are now trying to solve politically; if we succeed, we will consider replicating the agreement elsewhere, starting in South Waziristan.  4. (C) Orakzai explained that he is reviewing mechanisms for taking action with the 15-member committee charged with monitoring/implementing the peace agreement.  Ambassador asked what steps will be taken if violators of the agreement are apprehended and whether any punishments had been handed down.  In particular, Ambassador expressed interest in the outcome of the case of ten militants who were caught crossing the border on September 19 and jailed in Miranshah.  5. (C) No punishments have been rendered thus far, the Governor responded.  However, local tribal leaders, he said, have the authority to take action such as extradition, expulsion, and destruction of crops.  The local tribe, Orakzai maintained, will be held accountable for violations of the agreement.  If the tribe fails to punish violators, he continued, the Political Agent is empowered to enforce collective punishment under the Frontier Crimes Regulation. The force of collective punishment carried great weight, Orakzai commented, particularly since many tribes had interests in the settled areas that could be targeted.  If these avenues failed, the Army and FC were still available as \"ultimate\" enforcers, he said.  Patrolling the Border ---------------------   ISLAMABAD 00019796  002 OF 003   6. (C) Pakistani forces have begun patrolling between posts as agreed at the August Tripartite Commission meeting.  The Governor understood that similar patrols are taking place on the Afghan side of the border.  Orakzai pressed for \"real time\" intelligence to give Pakistani forces the best advantage possible in pursuing cross-border movements.  Improving Counter-Insurgency Capabilities -----------------------------------------  7. (C) MG Helmly briefed the Governor on an on-going ODRP assessment aimed at determining Pakistani counter-insurgency assistance needs.  Upgrading Pakistan's capabilities, he explained, was being mapped out over a five-year period.  MG Helmly noted that eight attack helicopters with night-time fighting capability had been fast-tracked for delivery in November and would be operational in January.  ODRP was also looking at night vision equipment and communications gear for the FC.  Finalizing a FATA Strategy --------------------------  8. (C) Orakzai re-affirmed the need to augment the FC and asked about a timeline for funding, as well as support for the government's economic and social development plans.  He expressed appreciation for U.S. assistance, commenting that USD 150 million would have a significant impact on the FATA. Ambassador underscored the importance of completing a comprehensive FATA plan, particularly for preparing requests to Congress.  ACS Arbab said that the FATA Secretariat, with USAID assistance, expected to have a comprehensive strategy ready by late October.  Reducing Poppy Cultivation --------------------------  9. (C) Pakistan was within reach, Ambassador noted, of being removed from the list of \"major illicit drug producing\" countries.  Poppy cultivation in Khyber Agency and Charsadda were the biggest obstacles to achieving that goal, he said. The Governor assured that reducing poppy cultivation in the tribal areas and the NWFP remains a top priority and that the success of the past five years is an indicator of the government's commitment.  Orakzai acknowledged that Khyber Agency has a \"law and order\" problem.  However, the situation was being addressed, he said, and several poppy growers had recently been arrested.  Private Exhange on NWA Jirga ----------------------------  10. (C)  In a private exchange before the larger meeting, the Ambassador noted that the information available to us indicated a sharp increase in militant activity in the border area in August with no decline in September.  We were also concerned over reports that the militants who had been detained by tribesmen after the September 18/19 incident had been released to the Haqqanis.  The Governor denied that this was the case, asserting that tribal leaders were deliberating the issue and deciding what course of action to take.  He said the government was determined that the conditions of the agreement be respected.  Either the tribes enforced it or the government would take action against the tribes.  The Ambassador said that the conditions of the agreement as we understood them - no presence of foreigners, no cross-border militancy, no \"talibanization\" - were good, but what counted was implementation on the ground.  We would be watching closely. The Governor reiterated that he was determined that the agreement would be respected.  If it were not, force would be exercised.  ISLAMABAD 00019796  003 OF 003    11.  (C)  In response to the Ambassador's query, the Governor said he considered the initiative for tribal jirgas attended by Presidents Musharraf and Karzai on both sides of the Durrand Line a positive one, consistent with Pakistan's current effort to bring the tribes over to the government's side.  He noted that there were a number of issues to be worked out, such as participation:  on the Pakistan side, would it involve only the tribes areas or Pashtuns from all over the NWFP? How broad would participation be in Afghanistan?  Comment -------  12. (C) The spate of incidents in September in NWA (reftel) was troubling, but may have resulted in part from the gap between signing the peace deal and providing guidance to the monitoring committee.  Orakzai, in his first week back on the job since he accompanied President Musharraf to Washington, seems keenly aware of the spotlight that is now on North Waziristan - and the accompanying pressure and urgency to make commitments and punishments stick. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/10/2006 12:03", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 019804  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, EAID, ECON, SOCI, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH FATA SECRETARIAT ADDITONAL CHEIF SECRETARY ARBAB, 5 OCTOBER 2006  Summary --------  1.  (U)  Ambassador met with Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) Secretariat Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) Shehzad Arbab on October 5.  FATA Secretariat Secretary for Planning and Development Zafar Hassan, ODRP Chief MG Helmly, Islamabad DATT, Peshawar PO, USAID Officer (notetaker) were also present.  Meetings with NWFP Governor Orakzai and 11th Corps Commander LTG Hamid reported septels.  2.  (U)  ACS Arbab reported that the FATA Sustainable Development Plan should be ready for distribution to donors in time for a February 2007 donors conference.  The FATA Secretariat has undergone a re-organization and is focused on  SIPDIS collecting baseline data as well as upgrading FATA infrastructure.  The recently created FATA Development Authority is intended to complement the work of the Secretariat as a public-private partnership.  The Secretariat  SIPDIS will focus on the social sector while the FDA will give attention to the productive sector.  End Summary.  Finalizing the FATA Development Plan ------------------------------------  3.  (U)  Ambassador reinforced that plans to finalize a FATA Sustainable Development Plan (SDP) by the end of October was welcome news.  Arbab estimated the SDP's budget at approximately USD $2 billion.  The ACS also expected that the SDP would be ready for distribution to donors in time for a February 2007 conference.  Re-Inventing the FATA Secretariat ---------------------------------  4.  (U)  The ACS reported that the FATA Secretariat had been strengthened through a recent re-organization that established four Additional Secretaries who will cover planning/development, law and order, coordination, and finance.  A Director for Monitoring (programs) has also been created.  Approximately USD $10 million, Arbab said, was allocated for capacity building.  Gathering a wide range of baseline data is a key priority for the Secretariat. Improving/creating infrasctructure, particularly institutions of higher education, roads, irrigation works, and mines were also at the top of the agenda.  Role of the FATA Development Authority --------------------------------------  5.  (U)  Regulations creating and governing the FATA Development Authority had also recently been approved, the ACS continued.  The purpose of the FDA is to encourage private sector investment in the FATA.  The FDA will have a seven-member board comprised of public (three) and private (four) sector representatives.  Arbab himself will be the Board's Chief Executive.  NWFP Governor Orakzai will designate the board members from the private sector.  That selection is expected shortly, Arbab said.  The FDA will also have a Steering Committee with representatives from the federal government, chaired by the Governor, with a mandate to set broad policy direction.  The Board would have freedom of action within that framework.  The FATA Secretariat, Arbab said, will oversee the Fata's social sector development (primarily health and education) while the FDA will oversee the productive sector (infrastructure, mineral development, vocational training, and Reconstruction Opportunity Zones).  Comment -------  6.  (SBU) While the outlines of the machinery to tackle the  ISLAMABAD 00019804  002 OF 002   problems of the FATA are beginning to take shape, there are many blanks still to be filled in.  The Secretariat's capacity to operate on the ground in the tribal areas will continue to present significant challenges.  Turf wars with the federal government and provincial actors may emerge, affecting the effectiveness of the re-organized FATA Secretariat and the newly created FDA. One factor in favor of  SIPDIS the FATA Sectretariat's ability to accomplish its mission is the professional and energetic leadership of the ACS. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/19/2006 4:31", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 020570  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, MOPS, PTER SUBJECT: FATA SECURITY UPDATE:  SEPTEMBER 22-OCTOBER 12  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU)  Introduction:  This cable reports on security developments in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) between September 22 and October 13, as culled from press reports and conversations with post's interlocutors.  The cable also lists cross-border activity from FATA and North West Frontier Province (NWFP) tracked by the  Office of Defense Representative Pakistan (ODRP).  --------------------------------------------- -------- North Waziristan Jirga Agreement Update --------------------------------------------- ---------  2.  (SBU)  The following incidents reported in open sources constitute violations of the September 5 jirga agreement between the Government of Pakistan (GOP) and North Waziristan Agency (NWA) tribal leaders.  \"No parallel authority\"  --The press reported that, on October 1, GOP officials closed a Taliban office that had opened September 27 near the Miran Shah bus station.  Taliban leaders were reported as saying that they had opened the office to deal with lawlessness in the town.  --On October 1, \"The Nation\" reported that the Taliban had opened offices in Razmak and Mirali with the goal of stopping armed roberies and other crimes in NWA.  \"No targeted killings\"  --On September 22, multiple papers reported that assailants shot dead Wazir Khan, an Afghan, in NWA.  Unnamed sources claimed the man had \"spied for the U.S.\"  --The press also reported that, on September 28, authorities discovered the body of Malang Khan (or Malang Rahim Jan,) an Afghan from Khost province.  A note attached to the body said the man had been killed for \"spying for the U.S.\"  --The Nation reported on October 12 that the bodies of two men accused of spying for the U.S. were found in two different areas of Miran Shah.  The paper said the Taliban had abducted the two men earlier in the week.  There were no developments of note during this period on other sections of the jirga agreement, including promises of no attacks on GOP government officials or buildings. Similarly, there were no reports of GOP failures to uphold their side of the agreement, including restitution payments to victims of collateral damage.  --------------------------------------- Jirga Agreement Enforcement ---------------------------------------  3.  (SBU)  On September 28, the Government of Pakistan (GOP) and tribal leaders announced establishment of a ten-member committee to monitor NWA jirga agreement implementation.  The committee's stated objectives were serving as a \"bridge\" between the Utmanzai tribe and the GOP; ensuring implementation of the agreement; and acting against \"individiuals\" not abiding by the agreement.  On October 3, the Governor of NWFP asked tribal leaders to redouble their efforts to use the jirga mechanism to enforce the September 5 agreeement.  4.  (SBU)  During an October 6 meeting with the press, President Musharaff expressed \"satisfaction\" over the improving situation in NWA.   ISLAMABAD 00020570  002 OF 003   ------------------------------- Cross-border Insurgency -------------------------------  5.  (S)  The Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) reported a significant increase in cross-border activity from FATA and NWFP to Afghanistan during the week of October 8 -15.  The number of indirect fire attacks remained the same, but U.S. forces reported the highest frequency of enemy infiltration and direct fire contacts since the beginning of Ramadan (September 25-26).  There was a spike in improvised explosive devices (IEDs) placed along the border. Anti-Coalition Militias (ACMs) placed IEDs beside the road used by Pak-Mil to attend a Coalition-Pak-Mil border flag meeting.  ACMs also placed IEDs along supply routes. The majority of these attacks took place in the vicinity of Forward Operations Base (FOB) Tillman, across the border from NWA.  Cross border activity, broken down by FATA agency/NWFP district included:  -- South Waziristan Agency (SWA):  October 2-3  -- U.S. forces engaged two enemy foreign fighter sanctuaries directly on the border.  October 9, 12 and 13 -- rockets fired on Forward Operations Base (FOB) Bermal from within Afghanistan near SWA.  -- NWA:  October 1 and 3 -- Coalition vehicles were struck by IEDs in the area across from NWA.  October 2 -- U.S. forces engaged seven (7) ACMs who were placing IEDs in area immediately adjacent to border with NWA. October 7 -- U.S. patrol received small arms fire and heavy machine gun fire on Afghan side of border.  October 8 -- 10-15 ACMs with AK-47s and rocket propelled grenades (RPGs) crossed border from NWA then returned to NWA following engagement with U.S. forces. October 11 and 12 -- in two separate incidents, 16-18 ACMs crossed border from NWA, fled back to NWA following engagement with U.S. forces.  -- Kurram Agency: October 6 -- A U.S. patrol came under small arms fire in the area across the border from Kurram.  -- Khyber Agency: Oct 10 -- Rockets were fired at Camp Torkham from the Khyber Agency.  -- Dir/Chitral District, NWFP:  October 1 -- U.S. forces observed and engaged 3-5 ACMs with weapons and packs moving along border.  October 3 -- Operation Buzzard took small arms fire and engaged ACMs with small arms fire and mortars 1.5 kilometers from Pakistan border.  October 5 -- joint patrol engaged by ACM small arms fire from vicinity of known ACM safe house on Pak-Afghan border.  ------------------------------------- Dissension in Taliban Ranks? -------------------------------------  6.  (C)  An Embassy contact in South Waziristan Agency (SWA) reported that Uzbek fighters forced to leave NWA after the September 5 jirga agreement now feared they could eventually lose their sanctuary in SWA and were willing to \"fight for their survival\" if necessary.  The newspapers \"Dawn\" and \"Daily Times\" both reported clashes in SWA between Taliban who were opposed to foreign fighters remaining in the Waziristan agencies and those who had alliances with foreign fighters, mainly Uzbeks.  The papers reported an IED attack on Khanan Wazir, the amir (local Taliban leader) in Shakakai.  (Wazir opposes the influence of foreigners in Waziristan.) Several days later, the papers reported that, while Wazir was still in hospital, militants killed two of his supporters and injured three others.  Post contacted other journalists covering the FATA who confirmed these stories.  Meanwhile, in early October, the son of Uzbek commander Jaffar Assad was found in Wana, SWA, strangled to death.  ISLAMABAD 00020570  003 OF 003    --------------------------- Non - FATA militants ---------------------------  7.  (C)  Several Pakistani papers carried stories in late September about young men from the NWFP proper (i.e., from the province's settled districts, not from FATA) who had been killed in fighting in Afghanistan.  The stories echoed fears GOP officials have expressed to post:  if Taliban and other militants in FATA are not brought under control, their extremist ideology could spread into NWFP and then into other parts of Pakistan.  Examples of what would be a worrisome trend include:   -- Qari Fazle Amin, a young man from a village 25 kilometers from Peshawar, died as a suicide bomber in Helmand Province, Afghanistan.  (News of his death reached his village September 17.)  --Of seven bodies returned to SWA from Afghanistan in late September, four were of militants from Charsadda, NWFP.  Of the other three, two were Tajiks and one a Waziri.  -- An Embassy contact in SWA told post that he had recently seen new Taliban recruits in his area who were from from settled areas of NWFP, as well as from parts of Punjab and Sindh.  ------------------------ Sectarian Violence ------------------------  8.  (SBU)  A long simmering Sunni/Shi'a feud over access to the Mian Anwar Shah shrine in Orakzai Agency turned into full scale violence on October 3.  By the time a jirga-brokered ceasefire went into effect on October 9, the official death toll was 29, though locals claimed 54 people had died in the fighting.  Some locals indirectly blamed the Taliban, who in 2000 voided a long-standing British agreement that granted Shi'as access to the shrine.  (Additional details on sectarian conflicts will be reported septel by AmConsul Peshawar.)  ------------ Comment ------------  9.  (S)  While NWA appears to be quieter internally than prior to the June ceasefire and September jirga agreement, the uptick in cross-border attacks is troubling.  As post has emphasized to the GOP, the true proof of the agreeement's efficacy will be if attacks on coalition forces decrease in the NWA area.  Meanwhile, the recent sectarian violence highlights again both the large number of weapons in the area and the power of religious extremists in FATA.  End Comment.     BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD20669|06STATE166404|06STATE169418|06STATE172816", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2006 6:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 020669  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2016 TAGS: KN, KNNP, PK, PREL, UN SUBJECT: DEMARCHES DELIVERED:  GOP REACTION TO DPRK NUCLEAR TEST AND UNSCR 1718  REF: A. STATE 172816      B. STATE 169418      C. STATE 166404      D. GRENCIK-AGUILAR EMAIL 04 OCT 2006      E. GRENCIK-AGUILAR EMAIL 09 OCT 2006  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable contains an action request -- please see para. 6.  2.  (C)  Summary:  The Government of Pakistan has condemned the nuclear tests conducted by North Korea and is in the process of preparing administrative notices necessary for UNSCR 1718 to take effect in Pakistan.  Despite the GOP's strong language condemning the DPRK action, South Korean diplomats have heard rumors that the DPRK gave the GOP advance notice of the October 8 test.  While the MFA has assured post that the GOP maintains only minimal diplomatic ties with North Korea, a high-ranking member of the government toasted Pakistan-(North) Korean friendship at an Islamabad party on October 13. End summary.  3.  (U)  The Government of Pakistan has taken a firm stand condemning the North Korean nuclear test.  On October 4, the MFA issued a press statement saying that North Korea's announced intention to conduct a nuclear test was a \"matter of deep concern for Pakistan.\" the GOP urged the DPRK to desist from introducing nuclear weapons into the Korean Peninsula, calling the prospect \"deeply destabilizing.\"  The statement noted Pakistan's support for the six-party talks. (Ref D)  Following news of the test, the MFA Spokesperson read the following statement at her regularly-scheduled Monday press briefing:  -- Pakistan deplores the announcement by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that it has conducted a nuclear test.  This would be a destabilizing development for the region.  -- We had urged the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to desist from introducing nuclear weapons in the Korean Peninsula.  It is regrettable that the DPRK chose to ignore the advice of the international community not to test a nuclear weapon device.  -- Pakistan has consistently supported the Six-party talks. We believe this mechanism should have been used to address North Korea's concerns.  We hope that all the countries in the region would exercise restraint.  4.  (SBU)  Poloffs have delivered several demarches on the North Korean nuclear test to the MFA (Disarmament Cell). (Ref A, B, C)  MFA officers have not been willing to offer analysis or comment on the situation beyond the public statement deploring the DPRK action.  5.  (SBU)  During an October 19 office call, Disarmament Director Mohammad Kamran Akhtar told poloffs that he had prepared a notice of UNSCR 1718 to be published in the Gazette of Pakistan, a necessary step under Pakistani law in order for a Security Council resolution to take effect. Akhtar noted that he had intended to append to the notice the list of proscribed items related to weapons of mass destruction referenced in OP 8 of the resolution, but could not locate the documents on the UN web site.  He has requested assistance from the Pakistani UN Mission, but also asked poloffs if they could help him locate the missing documents.  6.  (U)  Action Request: Post requests Department's (SCA and IO) assistance in locating documents No.S/2006/814 and S/2006/815, referenced in OP 8, so that we can expedite the GOP's publication of UNSCR 1718.   ISLAMABAD 00020669  002 OF 002   7.  (C)  Comment:  Despite the MFA's strong statements condemning the North Korean test, fanciful rumors have circulated through Islamabad that Pakistan had been advised of the test in advance.  Poloffs asked Akhtar about a Japanese press report that a delegation of approximately 20 Pakistani scientists had crossed into DPRK from China in the days before the test.  Akhtar flatly denied the report, saying that the MFA has not approved the travel of any scientists to DPRK.   Earlier in the week, the Deputy Chief of the South Korean Embassy solicited PolCouns' views of a rumor that the North Korean ambassador had called on President Musharraf on October 7, a day before the test. (Note:  When told that emboffs had not heard this particular rumor, the South Korean diplomat admitted that he personally found the story \"completely incredible.\"  End note.)   In eyebrow-raising contrast to the GOP's official condemnation of DPRK activities, however, Sunday's edition of \"The Nation\" carried a photo of an October 14 gathering hosted by the \"Pakistan-Korea Friendship Association\" in which DPRK Ambassador Ri and GOP State Minister for Information and PML-Q insider Tariq Azim were the guests of honor.  According to our South Korean colleague, representatives from his country were not/not included in the event.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE78323", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/23/2006 12:59", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 020831  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT - PLEASE PASS TO TREASURY  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2016 TAGS: EFIN, KTFN, PTER, PK SUBJECT: TERROR FINANCE:  RESPONSE RECEIVED TO REQUEST FOR IDENTIFIER INFORMATION  REF: STATE 78323  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S/NF)  On October 20, Ministry of Interior/National Crisis Management Cell (MOI/NCMC) Director General BG Cheema presented PolCouns and NAS Director with identifier information for two of the five individuals named reftel: Hafiz Muhammad Saeed and Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi. (Note:  This information is reproduced below.  End note.)   Cheema advised that NCMC is currently reviewing records of the national identification cards of two of the remaining individuals listed reftel; as these names are common in Pakistan, the search has thus far revealed more than 10,000 hits.  (Note: Cheema's claim about the number of matches for these two names is not incredible; post's CONS Section faces similar difficulties with its nameschecks of Pakistani visa applicants.  End note.)  NCMC officers are trying to narrow the search, in order to assure that any identifying information provided to the USG are for individuals associated with Lashkar-e-Tayyba and/or Jamaat ud-Dawa. BG Cheema suggested that this process may take another couple of weeks.  2.  (S/NF)  Cheema also advised emboffs that one of the individuals for whom post requested information is not a Pakistani citizen:  Sheikh Mehmood Ba Hazzaq Abdul Aziz is a Saudi national whose family had emigrated from India to Saudi Arabia in the 1940s before Partition.   According to Cheema, Aziz is a wealthy man who founded Markaz Dawa-tul-Irshad in Saudi Arabia.  Cheema asserted that Aziz had been introduced to Hafiz Saeed some twenty years ago by Allama Ehsan Elahi Zaheer (now deceased.)  Cheema suggested that he USG seek additional information on Aziz from the Government of Saudi Arabia.  3. (S/NF)  Background:  Emboffs first requested this identifier information from the GOP in an August 2006 meeting between the Charge d'Affaires and Interior Minister Sherpao. Post has followed up with the MOI on a regular basis since that meeting, pressing our request with increasing emphasis over the past four weeks.  4. (S/NF)  Comment:  Post would appreciate advance notice from WashDC agencies of any terror finance-related actions being contemplated against the individuals listed reftel.  5.  (SBU)  Identifier Information:  -- Hafiz Muhammad Saeed Name as appears on National Identification Card (NIC): Muhammad Saeed Aliases:  Hafiz Saeed, Hafiz Sahib DOB:  05 June 1950 POB:  Sargodha, Punjab NIC NO:  3520025509842-7 Father's name:  Kamal-ud-Din Passport No.:  does not have a current machine readable passport Temporary Address:  House No. 116/E, Mohalla Johar, Town: Lahore, Tehsil: Lahore City; District:  Lahore Permanent Address:  same Ancestral Address:  Chak No. 126/SB, Tehsil and District: Sargodha  -- Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi Name as appears on NIC:  Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi Aliases:  Waleed, abu Waleed DOB:  30 Dece 1960 POB:  Okara NIC No.:  61101-9618232-1 Father's name:  Hafiz Aziz-ur-Rehman Passport No.:  does not have a current machine readable passport Temporary Address:  Barahkoh, P.O. do, Tehsil and District: Islamabad Permanent Address:  Chak No. 18/IL, Rinala Khurd, Tehsil Rinala Khurd, District Okara    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE169257", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/23/2006 13:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 020834  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KTIA, PHUM, PREL, PK, UN SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED:  TRIPARTITE REQUEST ON THE UN DECLARATION ON THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES  REF: STATE 169257  (SBU)  On October 3, PolCouns joined the Australian Deputy High Commissioner (DHC) in delivering the points in reftel demarche to MFA (UN) Director Shafqat Ali Khan.  Khan listened carefully to the DHC's review of the joint Australian-New Zealand-U.S. position and remarked that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) shared many of the same concerns.  Despite this, Khan said, Pakistan has a strong interest in maintaining unity within the G-77 and NAM coalitions. Khan opined that by pressing it's views through a joint demarche, the U.S., Australia and New Zealand were contributing to the impression within the NAM and G-77  that is a \"north-south\" issue.  Noting that this Declaration is of paramount interest to many Latin America member statescountries, Khan suggested that the U.S., Australia and New Zealand work behind the scenes with one or two sympathetic South or Central American countries ; if such a country endorsed the points advocated in the joint demarche, it would be easier for states such as Pakistan to openly adopt a similar position. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE174281", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/23/2006 13:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 020835  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2016 TAGS: PK, KNNP, EG, KE, MNUC, PARM, PREL SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: PAKISTAN WILL SEND OBSERVERS TO PSI EXERCISE  REF: STATE 174281  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On October 19, PolCouns delivered reftel points to MFA (Disarmament) Director Mohammad Kamran Akhtar, along with a copy of the letter from General Abizaid inviting the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to participate in Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) Exercise \"Leading Edge.\"  The Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) forwarded General Abizaid's invitation to the Ministry of Defense and Joint Staff Headquarters on the same day.  2. (C)  On October 20, MFA Additional Secretary  (UN/Policy Planning) Tariq Usman Hyder contacted PolCouns to say that the GOP would like to send an observation team to this exercise, as it did with previous exercises in Singapore and Australia.  (Note:  The GOP has not/not changed its position on endorsing PSI principals and is therefore not/not eligible to be a full participant in Exercise Leading Edge.  End note.)  The MFA proposes sending two observers to this exercise:  BG Ausaf Ali, Strategic Plans Division, an observer at the earlier PSI exercise in Australia, as well as a naval officer to be identified in coming days.  3.  (C)  POL has shared this information with ODRP, which will coordinate arrangements with CENTCOM for the Pakistani observers' travel to Bahrain. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/23/2006 13:25", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 020836  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, IZ SUBJECT: PAKISTANI CONCERNS OVER SPECULATION ON U.S. WITHDRAWAL FROM IRAQ   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S) During an October 20 meeting with the Ambassador on Indo-Pak relations, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz shifted the conversation to ask about press reports that President Bush had likened the current situation in Iraq to the U.S. experience in Vietnam.  (Note:  Aziz's question was a reference to garbled reporting of the President's remarks during an ABC News interview when asked to comment on a Tom Friedman piece comparing Iraq to the 1968 Tet Offensive.  End note. )  These reports have been interpreted in the local press as a signal that USG policy has reached a tipping point with regard to the future of the U.S.  deployment in Iraq. Aziz was stark in his commentary, stating plainly that if the U.S. walks away from the fight in Iraq, moderate Muslim leaders such a President Musharraf may not survive.  \"They day after you leave, the extremists will come for our heads,\" Aziz said.  For the sake of its moderate friends and allies, Aziz pleaded, the U.S. must stay the course in Iraq.  The Ambassador answered Aziz that while tactics may change to fit the circumstances, our commitment to Iraq remains firm.  2.  (U)  A day later, during the October 22 launch of the Urdu-edition of his auto-biography, President Musharraf rejected the proposal of British General Robert Dannert that the UK should withdraw its forces from Iraq, saying that \"withdrawal of troops by the U.S. and its allies right now would have far-reaching impact not only on the region, but also on the whole world.\"   Musharraf went on to say that the British general should have should have examined the pros and cons of a troop withdrawal at this juncture before offering his policy prescription, concluding by saying that he \"totally disagreed\" with the proposal.  3.  (S)  Comment:  Aziz's worried aside to the Ambassador and Musharraf's forthright criticism of General Dannert's proposal to quit the field illustrate our Pakistani GWOT partners' deep concern over the prospect of a premature U.S. withdrawal from Iraq.  As political leaders who face considerable domestic risks implementing tough policy decisions to advance our joint counter-terrorism agenda, uncoordinated talk of withdrawal timetables or references to the American pull-out from Vietnam must send chills down the spine of Musharraf and other moderate Muslims leaders in the region.  Our work will be considerably more difficult if Musharraf and the GOP leadership begin to factor the probability of an early force withdrawal in Iraq into their calculus balancing cooperation with the U.S. with Pakistan's darker domestic political realities. End comment.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06PESHAWAR632", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/23/2006 13:27", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 020837   E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PTER SUBJECT: PESHAWAR BOMBING UPDATE  REF: PESHAWAR 632  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and Comment:  The October 22 explosion in Peshawar's old city that killed at least seven people and wounded 40 others is a reminder that, while much of the world focuses on Pakistan's efforts to fight the export of terror, the GOP is also combating domestic terror and many other local challenges.  Early speculation on motives for the blast range from a message to the Frontier Corps, which has a base nearby, to another chapter in the sectarian tensions that plague the area, to an attempt by extremists to put the local cinema out of business.  Knee-jerk claims by some Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) officials that India and/or Afghanistan were involved, while widely and sharply discounted by the media, were unhelpful and irresponsible. The NWFP's senior elected official, NWFP Chief Minister Akram Durrani, was particularly disappointing when he insisted that \"a foreign hand\" was behind the attack.  AmConsul Peshawar notes that public concern over the general law and order situation in the NWFP is growing, and that the governing MMA coalition that Durrani leads may be looking to deflect responsibility for the blast onto forces beyond its control. End Summary and Comment.   2.  (U)  NWFP law enforcment authorities are investigating the October 22 IED explosion in a Peshawar market that killed at least seven (reftel).  The incident was the forth explosion in NWFP in a month, but the first with casualties. Local press editorials have noted the police's poor track record in solving similar crimes throughout Pakistan. According to the Dawn newspaper, there have been 33 terror attacks in Pakistan this year, most of them bombings.  At least 230 people have been killed in the attacks, notes the paper, but there have been few related arrests and almost no trials of the accused.  3.  (U)  On October 24, most of the papers of record comment on  the need to confront domestic terror and admit that, unless proven otherwise, it has been Muslim-on-Muslim, not influenced by India.  Many papers specifically criticize NWFP politicians, most of whom represent religious parties, for trying to blame India or Afghanistan while two of the most discussed theories for the blast involve either extremists wanting to put a cinema out of business or Shi'a-Sunni tensions over control of a mosque in Orakzai Agency.  NWFP opinion leaders also ask why security in Peshawar had not been tighter, given the series of September bombings and the large crowds in the market preparing for Eid.  (Note:  While the police have not identified the previous three bombings as deliberate, military authorities publicly identified all three as IED's. End Note.)  4.  (U)  The Eid holiday began Sunday evening in NWFP -- a day before in the rest of the Pakistan.  Amconsul Peshawar will have additional updates on the explosion once the holiday ends and officials are available for consultations.  CROCKER   NNNN " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD19796|06KABUL5218|06KABUL5451|06PESHAWAR636", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/27/2006 14:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 021073  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER, AF, PGOV SUBJECT: PAK-AFGHAN JIRGAS:  THE VIEW FROM PAKISTAN  REF: A. KABUL 5218      B. KABUL 5451      C. PESHAWAR 636      D. MAATA-AGUILAR EMAIL (O-I) 19 OCT 2006      E. ISLAMABAD 19796  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C/NF)  Summary and Comment:  Pakistani officials have been tasked to coordinate a border region jirga to which Afghan President Karzai would be invited, but are proceeding at a measured pace.  The Pakistan approach reflects a consensus that such an event must be organized with great care to avoid failure.  Post is inclined to respect the Pakistani assessment, given the multiple security and law enforcement challenges which now confront the Government in the Tribal Belt.  In post's view, the critical next step is for the Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan (GOP, GOA) to negotiate the timing and modalities of these parallel jirgas directly, as they are in the best position to judge their own domestic political realities and bureaucratic capacities.  As the two sides begin planning the parallel jirga(s), each must grapple with a variety of factors, ranging from the geographic area to be included, the participants to be invited and specific issues to be addressed -- all of which may require considerable analysis and grassroots outreach if the jirgas are not to be fraught with controversy.   North West Frontier Province (NWFP) Governor Orakzai, tasked by President Musharraf with overseeing jirga preparations, is now focused on ensuring successful implementation of the NWA peace deal and on finalizing the FATA Development Plan.  That groundwork must be in place to ensure that the cross-border jirga achieves the goals that Presidents Musharraf and Karzai discussed with President Bush at September's Trilateral Iftar.  End Summary and Comment.  ------------------------- One Jirga at a Time -------------------------  2.  (C)  While intrigued by the idea of a cross-border jirga, the GOP has not exhibited the sense of urgency expressed by President Karzai, as reported by Embassy Kabul (Refs A and B).  GOP officials are more concerned about ensuring that the Pakistan jirga does not create more problems than it might solve.  In his October 5 meeting with Ambassador Crocker (Ref E), NWFP Governor Orakzai took the Ambassador's point the GOP needed to begin moving forward on the jirga and said that he believed careful preparation would be important.  Governor Orakzai's secretary recently told PO/Peshawar it would be a mistake to try to move forward on the jirga before the GOP had time to digest lessons from NWA jirga implementation.  He thought it would take several months before provincial authorities could draw conclusions that might be of use in planning a cross-border jirga.   Governor Orkakzai has told the Ambassador that, in the interim, GOP jirga planners will consider the best parameters for the event:  should the jirga be limited to the FATA?  Extended to all NWFP?  Encompass the entire Pak-Afghan border?  Who should be invited to participate?  Who should be frozen out?  ---------------------------------------- Actually, Three Jirgas at a Time ----------------------------------------  3.  (C)  GOP capacity to manage security and political issues in the border area is already heavily taxed.  On October 27, the NWFP Governor's offices told PO/Peshawar that the office had not yet even looked at the jirga proposal, as it was focusing on other urgent matters.  Governor Orakzai is personally responsible for managing implementation of the North Waziristan Agency jirga agreement; in the past week, he has been drawn into a separate jirga in Bajaur Agency to resolve sectarian and other tensions.  The Governor also is  ISLAMABAD 00021073  002 OF 003   tamping down a deteriorating law-and-order environment and sectarian violence in Khyber Agency and confronting domestic terrorism, including four bombings in Peshawar in the past month.   The Governor and FATA Secretariat are simultaneously pushing forward a FATA development plan.  Elsewhere along the border, GOP security agencies remain engaged in operations against both the nationalist Baloch militancy and Taliban/anti-Coalition militias (ACMs) in Balochistan.  In early November, President Musharraf is expected to attend a \"reconciliation\" jirga with representatives of Baloch tribes.   4.  (C)  When pulsed by poloff on preparations for the parallel jirgas discussed at the Trilateral Iftar, MFA official said that it will not begin serious planning until Foreign Minister Kasuri has the opportunity to discuss the concept with FM Spanta at their next Ministerial meeting, now planned for late November or early December,  (Note:  Last spring, the GOP and GOA committed to holding quarterly Ministerials, alternating between the two capitals.  As the last meeting was held in Islamabad, Kabul would be the venue for the coming session.  The MFA's Afghanistan desk officer attributed the delay in not holding the Ministerial until Nov/Dec to a heavy post-Eid scheduling on FM Kasuri's calendar, as well as lack of responsiveness by the Kabul side.  End note.)  ------------- Comment -------------  5.  (C/NF)  Reporting from Emb Kabul (Ref A and B) and information gleaned from Pakistani officials reinforce post's belief that, for these parallel jirgas to succeed, the GOA and GOP must begin talking to each other directly to ensure consensus not only on timing and logistics, but on common strategies and goals.  Post understands that at the Trilateral Iftar, the two presidents each agreed to hold a jirgas -- one in Pakistan, one in Afghanistan -- which the other's president would be invited to attend, but that few other details were discussed.  It is perhaps not surprising that each capital has followed-up on the jirga concept with an idiosyncratic approach reflective of their different domestic challenges.  Post recommends that the USG encourage Pakistani and Afghan officials to outline their respective visions and work out the nuts-and-bolts of jirga management directly, while discouraging freelance outreach to potential participants or tribal representatives on the other side of the border.  6.  (C/NF)  While we see no indication that the GOP is deviating from the U.S. understanding of the jirgas' goals -- inducing tribal leaders to reaffirm loyalty to their respective national governments and renounce violent militancy and Islamic extremism in exchange for a renewed commitment to investment and development in the tribal areas -- we appreciate the judgment of Pakistani officials who see haste as a recipe for failure.   This view is shared by an astute observer well-versed in President Karzai's ambitions for the jirga process:  the Afghan Ambassador to Pakistan, just returned from consultations in Kabul, told the Ambassador that convening a jirga in his own country is a particularly complex and risky endeavor requiring exquisite preparation and stage-management, as the risk of the assembled tribal leaders deviating from the official script could lead to disastrous consequences.  He concluded that the Afghanistan jirga \"must be done right, not fast\"  -- an assessment equally applicable on the Pakistan side of the Durrand Line.       ISLAMABAD 00021073  003 OF 003    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/31/2006 10:08", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 021222  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2016 TAGS: MOPS, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER DISCUSSES BORDER AREA SECURITY, NWA JIRGA AGREEMENT AND PENDING ACTION AGAINST LET LEADER  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S/NF)  Summary and Introduction:  In an October 26 meeting with the Ambassador, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao offered a candid assessment of the security situation in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Agencies (FATA), sharing his private assessment that vigorous Government of Pakistan (GOP) action is necessary to prevent Taliban and extremist forces from filling a post-jirga political- and security-vacuum in North Waziristan Agency (NWA).   Noting that the jirga agreement had been blown out of proportion, the Minister called for Pakistani security forces taking a swift, firm action against tribesmen and militants who violate its terms.  Sherpao recounted, in some detail, Ministry of Interior (MOI) implementation of directives that emerged from a mid-October policy assessment meeting with President Musharraf  Successful implementation of this Border Control Exercise -- designed to channel cross-border traffic to a handful of crossing points equipped with modern immigration and customs technologies -- in Balochistan will be followed by similar program in North West Frontier Province (NWFP), including the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).   The Minister's description of the Border Control Exercise tracked with policy shifts that the Director General - Inter-Services Intelligence (DG ISI) flagged for Ambassador the previous week, while his assessment of the security situation in Balochistan and NWFP -- including reports of a nascent NWA-type agreement in Bajaur Agency -- was echoed by Presidential Chief of Staff Hamid Javaid in an October 30 conversation with the Ambassador.  End summary and introduction.  What's the View from the Potomac? ------------------------------------ 2.  (C)  Sherpao opened by asking for an assessment of President Musharraf's visit to Washington and the Ambassador's own consultations  in the U.S.   The Ambassador noted the broad interagency interest in the tribal belt along the Pak-Afghan border, particularly vis-a-vis the re-ermergence of the Taliban in southern Afghanistan.   Many in WashDC understand that there is no quick fix to security challenges that were decades in the making, the Ambassador said, a message that President Musharraf was able to underscore during his meetings with Administration officials.  The President's thorough explanation of the GOP multi-tiered FATA strategy, supplemented by the Ambassador's private discussions of directives by MOI and ISI to all Pakistani security forces to act vigorously against the Taliban in all venues, demonstrated that Pakistan's counter-insurgency strategy is moving in the right direction.  The USG is seriously examining how best the U.S. can support GOP long-term initiatives for social and economic development in the FATA, as well as assistance to enhance the counter-insurgency capacities of the Frontier Corps (FC).  3.  (C)  That said, the Ambassador underscored the deep concern in WashDC regarding the Taliban insurgency and the security situation in the FATA and Balochistan, as the U.S. is seeing continued high levels of cross border activity targeting Coalition and Afghan forces.  Equally worrying are media reports that, following the September 5th jirga agreement, the Taliban has filled a political vacuum in NWA, establishing offices, operating security checkpoints and asserting control over local populations.  The Minister nodded in agreement, saying that the situation was reminiscent of South Waziristan Agency (SWA), which he admitted has been under Taliban control since a 2004 agreement ended GOP security operations against local militants.  Border Management Exercise in Balochistan ---------------------------------------------  ISLAMABAD 00021222  002 OF 004    4.  (C)  Sherpao described how President Musharraf has convened his convened security advisors in mid-October to design tougher approach along the Pak-Afghan border.   The President's brain trust produced a strategy to enhance border security, beginning at the Chaman border crossing in Balochistan.  The plan synthesizes tighter immigration and customs regulation of human and vehicular traffic at Chaman, where an estimated 30,000 people and 1000 vehicles cross to/from Afghanistan.  Border-crossing cards will be issued to tribal members in the region, which must be swiped when crossing into/out of Pakistan.  All vehicles, commercial and personal, will be subject to documented Customs inspections and tracked to identify patterns.  Sherpao said that the MOI has built pre-fabricated shelters to protect new immigration and customs tracking equipment being delivered to implement the new procedures.  Three additional border crossing points have been identified to follow the same procedures as Chaman, with the MOI examining 4-5 more to add to the program.  When all are 7-8 are in operation, the GOP will close the remaining 25 existing legal crossing points, as well as 150 known illegal crossings, using a variety of methods -- including fencing, mining and security monitoring -- to make sure that cross-border traffic is channeled into areas with enhanced security procedures.  (Comment:  In an earlier conversation, DG ISI offered a similar description of the strategy to emerge following the meeting with President Musharraf -- but with the caveat that many of the President's prescriptions, such as mining the areas around the 175-plus closed crossing points, were simply not feasible.  In his meeting with Sherpao, the Ambassador cautioned that, although the USG has no objection to well-deployed minefields, the GOP must be committed to 24/7 monitoring of any mined area in order to prevent ACMs from stealing the mines and using them against GOP and Coalition forces.  End comment.)  The same approach will be employed in the FATA and NWFP, following successful implementation in Balochistan.  5.  (C)  Sherpao reviewed the success of the GOP's targeting of Afghans in Balochistan engaged in the insurgency.   The MOI has raided hospitals in Quetta in an effort designed to deny aid and comfort to wounded anti-Coalition militants. Hospital administrators and staff are under compulsion to advise the authorities of young men, particularly Afghans, seeking treatment for wounds associated with combat operations.  Dovetailing with the issuance of new registration/identification cards to Afghan refugees, police and other security agencies have been instructed to adopt a \"no tolerance\" approach when they encounter young Afghan me loitering in public places:  if the Afghans are hanging about without proper documents, they will be swiftly repatriated across the border.  (Note:  Post forwarded a list passed by DG ISI to Ambassador identifying Afghans caught up in these Balochistan security operations; see TDX-315/75811-06.  End note).  Sherpao described these efforts as initial steps before the GOP confronts the critical challenge of the Girdi Jungle and Pir Ali Afghan refugee camps.  FC units are currently staffing checkpoints to monitor traffic in and out of the camps, but in the Minister's assessment, \"the camps have to go.\"   Sherpao indicated that these new immigration and customs procedures have been outlined to Afghan Ambassador Tarzi, but that the strategy targeting hospitals and undocumented Afghans has not.  (Note:  In a October 30 meeting, Presidential Chief of Staff Hamid Javaid echoed Sherpao's assessment, telling the Ambassador that, although GOP raids between October 27-29 had nabbed another dozen Afghan militants, the GOP cannot defeat this enemy so long as the camps remain open.  Jvaid said that President Musharraf is seized of this issue. End note.)  South Waziristan Deja Vu --------------------------  ISLAMABAD 00021222  003 OF 004    6.  (S/NF)  Turning to NWA, Sherpao described the jirga agreement as having been blown out of proportion by the media.  The jirga agreement was never intended to be a a quick fix, he said.  Even within these parameters, however, Sherpao agreed with the Ambassador's assessment that the Taliban has rushed in to fill a political void.  The Minister pointed to clear instructions from the President that tribesmen must adhere to the agreement's injunctions against parallel administration and the spread of Talibanization, including orders to close Taliban offices that had opened in Miran Shah, before admitting that he could not contradict press accounts of a very different reality on the ground. The GOP is aware that ACMs formerly in NWA are on the move, crossing into Afghanistan from other FATA agencies, a practice that must stop.  For the jirga agreement to succeed, Sherpao said, the government and tribal leaders must have a common understanding of the respective obligations, coupled with quick GOP reaction to infractions that threaten security.  Sherpao admitted that serious threats are emanating from NWA , noting that the car bomb used in the March 3rd bombing of the U.S. Consulate had been wired and then driven from NWA to Karachi and that the missiles recovered in the October 2006 Rawalpindi/Islamabad plot targeting President Musharraf's camp office, the Parliament and other GOP offices also originated in NWA.   Saying that Pakistan cannot afford another SWA situation, Sherpao concluded by noting that GOP security agencies are preparing an assessment of the jirga agreement to present to President Musharraf in late October/early November.  Is Bajaur Next? ----------------  7.  (S/NF)  The Ambassador told Sherpao that he has shared serious USG concerns wtih DG ISI and President Mushrraf's Chief of Staff Hamid Javaid over reports that Pakistani authorities had released several militant detainees in Bajaur agency, including some associated with Tehrik-Nifaz-i Shariat-i Mohammadi (TNSM - Movement for the Enforcement of Mohammad's Sharia ).  These reports are particularly troubling, as TNSM leader Maulana Faqir Mohammad is a declared enemy of both the GOP and the U.S.   During his WashDC visit, President Musharraf recognized the nexus between al Qaeda and the TNSM militants in Bajaur, suggesting that this unholy alliance made the agency a logical choice for al Qaeda senior leaders seeking refuge.  Sherpao noted the Ambassador's points, saying that the situation in Bajaur would also be on the agenda when the security agencies briefed the President.  (Note:  Mission will report septel on the Bajaur jirga, held October 28, followed by a massive anti-American rally on October 29 and October 30 security operations targeting a TNSM madrassa, in which 70-80 militants were killed.  End note.)  Strong Action after Eid ------------------------  8.  (S)  Sherpao confirmed that the GOP plans a series of forceful actions following the Eid-al-Fitr holiday, plans initially briefed to the Ambassador by DG ISI.  This includes the sacking of police chiefs in all four provinces, a step DG ISI explained as necessary because \"the Taliban is everywhere\" and current police leadership has not proven up to the task of confronting this nationwide threat.  Sherpao told Ambassador that he has decided against any change in the two FC Inspector Generals (the Corps' highest ranking officers) at the this time.  The Ambassador advised both Sherpao and DG ISI that the GOP should be sure to provide an explanation of these actions to the Pakistani public, emphasizing that sacking the police chiefs is a principled decision necessary to defend against the extremist threat to  ISLAMABAD 00021222  004 OF 004   the nation.  The Ambassador stressed that the public should also be told that the police and other security officials have been empowered to act against Taliban and other extremist militants wherever they are encountered.  Such a message would make clear to Pakistani people that these actions serve the public interest and safety, while signaling to the international community the government's commitment to confront violent extremism; an early and well-crafted public statement would also be an effective response to the negative assessment of Pakistan's commitment to the GWOT in the international press.  LeT Amir Hafiz Mohamad Saeed ----------------------------------  9.  (S/NF)  Turning to another perennial figure in Pakistan's campaign against extremism, Sherpao previewed GOP plans to re-arrest the leader of Lashkar-e-Tayyba/Jamaat ud-Dawa (LeT/JuD), Hafiz Mohammad Saeed, after Eid.  This time, Sherpao said, the charges will be under the Security of Pakistan Act (SOPA).  The decision to proceed under the SOPA was taken following consultations with the Attorney General, following the embarrassing ruling by a Lahore High Court judge granting Saeed's petition for release after finding that provincial prosecutors had ordered his detention in bad faith.  A charge under the SOPA will permit authorities to detain Saeed for 30 days, with an extension to 90 days if approved by a panel of two Pakistan Supreme Court and one provincial High Court judges; the detention order must thereafter be reviewed at 90-day intervals.  The Ambassador welcomed this news and encouraged the GOP to extend the strategy to the rest of LeT/JuD's senior leadership, whose actions have expanded from attacks against India to direct support for the insurgency in Afghanistan.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD21073|06KABUL5218|06KABUL5270", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/31/2006 10:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 021223  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO EUR/PRM KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2016 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK-AFGHAN JIRGAS:  PRESIDENTIAL CHIEF OF STAFF RESPONDS TO AFGHAN NON-PAPER  REF: A. KABUL 5270      B. ISLAMABAD 21073      C. KABUL 5218  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and introduction:  In a October 30 meeting, Presidential Chief of Staff Hamid Javaid shared with Ambassador a non-paper passed to Government of Pakistan (GOP) from the Government of Afghanistan (GOA) via the UN Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).   Javaid noted that the GOP envisioned something quite different from the description in GOA paper when President Musharraf agreed to the parallel jirgas during the September 27 Trilateral Iftar at the White House.  Javaid also questioned why the GOA elected to pass the paper via UNAMA, rather than through bilateral diplomatic channels, stating that the two governments need to deal with each other directly to reconcile their diverging views of the jirga process.  End summary and introduction.  2.  (C)  The Ambassador opened his call on Javaid by noting that the GOA is under the impression that the GOP does not/not want to move forward with the two jirgas discussed at the Trilateral Iftar hosted by President Bush. (Ref C) Javaid responded that this was not true:  the GOP remains ready and willing to engage the GOA on the jirga proposal. He suggested that the two sides engage in planning sessions to consider the most appropriate parameters and timing to ensure a successful outcome.  3.  (C)  Having expressed Pakistan's support for the jirga concept, Javaid said that an Afghan non-paper on jirga organization (text in para. 8) had been delivered by UNAMA D/SRSG Chris Alexander delivered to National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz.  The non-paper proposed a much larger, broader gathering than that contemplated by the GOP.  The GOA appears to be committing to a large-scale, all-encompassing event drawing participants from the central government and all Afghan provinces.  Such a scope would be inappropriate in Pakistan, which intended to draw participants from only from geographic areas populated by Pashtun tribes -- i.e., along the Pak-Afghan border.   Rather than focusing on Pashtun tribal leadership, Javaid said that Kabul appears to want a to use the jirgas as a grand modern-day state-to-state darbar.  4.  (C)  According to Javaid, the asymmetries between the Pakistani and Afghan visions for the jirgas extends beyond the breadth of participation.  In response to a question by the Ambassador, Javaid affirmed that President Musharraf had asked NWFP Governor Orakzai to coordinate and implement the jirga on the Pakistani-side.  The GOP subsequently learned that President Karzai had appointed FM Spanta to coordinate the Afghan jirga, which would require Pakistan to shift at least some aspects of jirga planning to the MFA to maintain parity; unfortunately, as the MFA is staffed by Pakistanis of all ethnic backgrounds, finding an appropriate Foreign Office interlocutor with the requisite knowledge of Pashtun customs could be a challenge.  These are matters that the sides should discuss directly before proceeding further, Javaid concluded.  5.  (C)  Comment:  The GOA non-paper describes \"joint jirgas\" that reach far beyond the leaders of the Pashtun tribes that span the Durrand Line -- the concept that the GOP carried home from the White House Trilat Iftar.  Without dwelling on any particular issue, Javaid expressed minor annoyance that the GOA non-paper views jirga details as settled matters,  ISLAMABAD 00021223  002 OF 003   rather than as propositions for GOP consideration.  Javaid betrayed the same irritation displayed by other Pakistani interlocutors in reaction to perceived GOA overreaching. For example, on question of who would represent Pakistan at the Afghan jirga, it appears that the GOA intends for the GOP delegation to include all participants in the Pakistani jirga; presumably, the GOA would want the GOP to extend reciprocal invitations to all 180-200 participants in the Afghan jirga, a prospect that may daunt even the most hospitable GOP host.  The GOA non-paper declares that President Karzai has solicited the assistance of UNAMA in organizing the jirgas (emphasis on the plural, indicating both the Afghan and Pakistani events), presenting the GOP with a de facto third-party facilitator without prior consultation.  While not knowing what additional messages the D/SRSG may have personally delivered to NSA Tariq Aziz, post believes that the GOA would have solicited a more positive reaction had it pulsed the GOP reaction to using UNAMA as an emissary and interlocutor.  6.  (C)  Comment (cont):   The GOA non-paper unfortunately arrived as the GOP is trying to contain public reaction to the security operations against an extremist madrassa in Bajaur Agency.  Also, President Karzai's personal outreach to ANP leader Asfandyar Wali Khan and JUI-F leader Maulana Fazl ur-Rehman has drawn media attention, prompting public grumbling about perceived Afghan meddling in Pakistan's internal affairs.  While post is encouraged by Emb Kabul's report that President Karzai reached out directly to President Musharraf with an Eid telephone call (Ref A), The USG must encourage both sides to begin direct discussion of their jirga options as soon as possible.  End comment.  7.  (C)  Text of GOA Non-Paper:  (Begin text.)  Jirgas on Security in Afghanistan and Pakistan  Current Status of Initial Planning  -- The purpose of these jirgas is to generate structured discussion and decisions by national political and civil society leaders from both countries of measures to end terrorism as a major factor fueling insecurity in the region.  -- The Government of Afghanistan is planing to host the first joint jirga will full Pakistani participation before the end of 2006.  -- The current proposed composition of the Afghan jirga is as follows:  Speakers and Vice Speakers of the Meshrano and Wolesi Jirgas (6) Chairs of Wolesi Jirga Commissions (18) Chairs of Meshrano Jirga Commissions (18) Chairs of Provincial Councils (34) Members of the Ulema Council of Afghanistan (34) Two respected elders or representatives from each province (68) Further Parliamentary, political, women's or civil society representatives (10 ) Total Afghan participants:  180 - 200 Total Pakistani participants: (to be determined)  -- In addition, the President of Afghanistan and two Vice  ISLAMABAD 00021223  003 OF 003   Presidents would participate.  The members of the cabinet (25) would take part as observers, as would representatives of UNAMA and the international community.  -- President Karzai is currently considering several candidates for membership in an organizing committee for the Afghan jirga, but they have not yet been selected.  -- National regional and tribal balance will be respected and preserved but it is not now anticipated that additional representation to be given to border provinces.  -- President Karzai intends to invite President Musharraf and the members of the Pakistani jirga to participate in the Afghan jirga.  It has not yet been determined whether the presidents would preside, participate or observe.  -- President Karzai has asked UNAMA to assist the Afghan government with the preparations and monitoring of the jirgas.  -- Exact timing and location have not yet been determined. Given that security is the primary issue, the most probable feasible locations in Afghanistan are Jalalabad and Kandahar.  Kabul is also an option.  (End text.)     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/31/2006 10:15", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 021224  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2016 TAGS: IN, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: MFA PREVIEWS EXPECTATIONS FOR COMPOSITE DIALOGUE  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  According to an MFA source, Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri's comments during an Indian television interview that he expected a breakthrough on the Siachen Glacier dispute during upcoming Composite Dialogue meeting were simply intended to generate positive public atmosphere in advance of the talks.  Pointing to strong Indian constituencies opposed to a Siachen resolution, the MFA has greater hopes for progress on Sir Creek, peace and security issues and the mechanism for counter-terrorism cooperation discussed by President Musharraf and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in Havana, as well as a handful of other lesser deliverables.  Jilani confirmed that FM Kasuri hopes to call on his MEA counterpart during a personal visit to India scheduled for late November.  End summary.  2.  (C)  In an October 30 conversation, PolCouns asked MFA Director General (India) Jalil Jilani about headlines in that morning's papers that FM Kasuri expected a breakthrough on the Siachen Glacier dispute at the November 14-15 Composite Dialogue meetings.  Jilani explained that the remarks, made during an interview with an Indian television outlet, were intended only to generate a positive buzz in the run-up to the talks.  In contrast, Jilani said that he had absolutely no hope of a Siachen solution in the near term, even though Islamabad and New Delhi have already sketched the outlines of a deal.  Jilani pointed to strong opposition to a Siachen resolution amongst the Indian military and defense establishment as the barrier to a resolution, a hurdle that PM Manmohan Singh had raised in his Havana meeting with President Musharraf in mid-September.  Singh had told Musharraf that his military advisors are apprehensive that Pakistan would re-occupy the heights -- including Indian posts -- were the sides to withdraw from their current lines.  Musharraf offered his personal assurance that Pakistan would honor a withdrawal agreement, saying  that it would be foolish to withdraw only to return, particularly as moving forward to the Indian posts would leave Pakistani units with a mountain at their backs, cut off from their supply lines. Citing a recent book by retired Indian General V.P. Malik -- like Musharraf, a veteran of the Kargil crisis -- Jilani said that Musharraf's guarantees would not carry any weight for Singh; the PM would have to have the Indian Army with him to cut a deal.  3.  (C)  Jilani was more optimistic on other topics on the Composite Dialogue agenda, calling resolution of the Sir Creek dispute \"doable,\" as it lacks the strategic importance of Siachen; also, both sides are under pressure to resolve the issue before the 2009 deadline of the UN Convention on the Law of the Seas.  An interagency session later in the day would review new proposals the GOP could take to New Delhi to advance a Sir Creek resolution.   He said that he has advised the Indian High Commission that the GOP is ready to sign an agreement on notification of nuclear accidents, a pact that had been passed between capitals several times.  An agreement on the modalities for monthly flag meetings of Army sector commanders, to complement the current quarterly flag meetings of the Pakistan Rangers and Indian Border Security Forces, is also within reach.   Jilani also identified agreements to prevent incidents on the high seas and to speed the return of persons who inadvertently cross the international border as possible deliverables at the Foreign Secretaries' meeting. On the other hand, Jilani described issues relating to Kashmir as within the exclusive confines of the back-channel dialogue between NSA Tariq Aziz and retired Indian diplomat S. K. Lamba.  4.  (C)  Jilani also expects progress on a mechanism for bilateral counter-terrorism cooperation.  He said that the two sides have agreed that the respective Foreign Offices will chair the mechanism, which will include representatives from security and intelligence agencies. Recognizing how uncomfortable the intelligence agencies were at the prospect  ISLAMABAD 00021224  002 OF 002   of sitting down with their long-time rivals, Jilani said he used the margins of the Havana meeting to stress to Indian Foreign Secretary-designate Menon that the mechanism should begin its work with items that were workable, in order to build confidence amongst the ISI and RAW representatives.  An Indian request that the GOP investigate Pakistani suspects in the Mumbai bombing who have been captured on intercepts would fall into realm of the possible, in Jilani's estimation; demanding the immediate extradition of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen leader Syed Salahuddin would not.  Jilani acknowledged that the Indian side might have higher expectations, but maintained that it was critical to build trust between the intelligence agencies for the mechanism to succeed.  5.  (C)  The GOP will also raise several practical matters affecting the efficacy of previously adopted confidence-building measures (CBMs).  For example, Jilani noted the low levels of passengers on the Amritsar - Narakana Sahib bus route, which often transports only 2-3 passengers per run.  The low passenger load led the sides to shelve plans for a train route originally intended to facilitate the travel of Sikh pilgrims to Guru Nana's birthplace shrine. Diplomats from the Pakistani High Commission have investigated why so many Sikh travelers, having been issued Pakistani visas, failed to actually make the pilgrimage; according to Jilani, the Sikhs reported that they had been denied clearance by local police authorities for travel to Pakistan.  6.  (C)  Noting that the Foreign Secretaries will confer on a convenient date for a Ministerial to conclude this round of the Composite Dialogue, Jilani confirmed that FM Kasuri intends to travel to India in late November at the invitation of his Cambridge classmate Mani Shankar Ayer, and that he hoped to combine the visit with a call on India's new External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukerjee.  In the interim, Islamabad will welcome India's new High Commissioner this week, and expects to have its new envoy in place in New Delhi by the end of November.  7.  (C)  Comment:  When asked for the MFA's reaction to Mukerjee's appointment, Jilani paused before offering his assessment of Mukerjee's predecessors, praising Jaswant Singh as an outstanding diplomat and voicing respect for the pragmatism of Yashwant Sinha and political skills of Natwar Singh.  Unfortunately, Jilani concluded, Mukerjee is simply not in the same class.   Jilani also suggested that, during the bilateral meeting in Havana, Indian diplomats appeared almost sheepish about the pause in diplomatic exchanges following the July Mumbai bombings.  Jilani shrugged, explaining that Pakistani officials understood that domestic political considerations necessitated the time-out after the terrorist attack.  When PolCouns noted Emb New Delhi's accounts of widespread Indian belief that Pakistan was behind the plot, Jilani was quick to emphasize that FS Menon had been clear in stating that India had not accused Pakistan of complicity in the bombing, and that even as tough a hard-liner as NSA Narayanan had admitted there was no \"clinching\" evidence of GOP involvement.   End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06PESHAWAR653", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/6/2006 7:56", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 021698  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2016 TAGS: MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: FATA SECURITY UPDATE:  OCTOBER 15-28  REF: PESHAWAR 653  Classified By: Amb. Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  ------------------------ Talibanization Spreading ------------------------  1.  (C) Embassy contacts in North Waziristan continue to report \"foreigners\" departing NWA for other tribal agencies, apparently a response to the September 5 jirga agreement.  The contacts add that militant commanders who remain in NWA are \"thriving,\" and that Taliban commanders are demanding fees and \"taxes\" from local businessmen.  One journalist tells post that the Taliban is distributing pamphlets in NWA \"requesting\" that businesses \"fund jihad.\"  Truck drivers, for example, are asked to contribute PRs. 15,000 (about USD 250) per six months. Contacts also report that the Taliban are meting out punishments for \"crimes\" like selling video cassettes. Taliban who had been \"hiding in the hills\" during Pak-Mil operations in NWA  during much of the last two years now feel secure visiting Miranshah; the locals report \"many new faces\" in the area.  2.  (S) A journalist in South Waziristan tells post he has seen troubling signs of Talibanization spreading to settled areas of NWFP, particularly Tank district.  He reports that the NWFP police are \"losing control of the situation.\"  As an example, he cites the closure of a police checkpoint between SWA and Tank that formerly discouraged extremists from moving from SWA into the rest of NWFP.  Several contacts report that militants \"firmly control SWA\" and that SWA young people increasingly find suicide bombings and other militant activities \"inspirational.\"  ------------------ Security Incidents ------------------  3.  (C)  According to press reports, on October 18, Afghan security officials paraded three captured self-confessed Taliban before reporters.  Two of the militants were from Miranshah, NWA.  The two Waziris said that Mullah Saifullah, an NWA militant commander who signed the NWA peace accord, sent them to fight Coalition forces in Paktika.  The men reported they entered Afghanistan on October 15 or 16, though they did not say where they crossed the border.  (Note:  If Mullah Saifullah encouraged them to cross the border to attack Coalition forces after September 5, he violated the jirga agreement.  End Note.)  4.  (S)  Contacts, ODRP, and the press continue to report that militants from NWA avoid embarrassing or incurring the wrath of NWA tribal leaders by crossing into Afghanistan via South Waziristan (primarily) or other FATA agencies. ODRP and other Embassy officials continue to raise concerns over this \"work around\" with Pak-Mil and other GOP officials.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Attacks on Coalition Forces Near the Pakistan Border --------------------------------------------- -------  5.  (S)  ODRP reports the following security incidents within five kilometers of the Pak-Afghan border:  --October 15-16:  Both nights, Coalition forces observed anti-Coalition militias (ACMs) crossing into Afghanistan in the vicinity of Zia Oba and BCP 213, opposite SWA.  The ACMs were attempting to set up rockets to fire at Coalition targets.  U.S. and Coalition forces engaged the ACMs.  --October 17:  U.S. forces engaged ACMs after a rocket attack on Forward Operating Base  (FOB) Bermel.  The point of origin of the attack was within 5 km of the Pakistan border, opposite the NWA/SWA seam.  ISLAMABAD 00021698  002 OF 002    October 21:  TF Spartan patrol reported contact with an ambush of 20-40 ACMs opposite the Chitral and Dir Agencies.  October 22, 23, 26, 27:  Rocket fire on FOB Bermel.  Fire originated from within five kilometers of Pakistan border.  October 23:  Rocket fire on FOB Tillman.  Fire originated from within five kilometers of Pakistan border.  October 23:  RPG and small arms fire on FOB Shkin, opposite SWA.  October 25:  Rockets fired at hospital in vicinity of Nawa Pass, opposite Bajaur Agency.  ------- Comment -------  6.  (C)  As the Mullah Saifullah incident illustrates, mechanisms to enforce the September 5 jirga agreement are either barely functional or do not exist.  Security officials tell post they are committed to enforcing the NWA agreement and to attacking militants when opportunities arise, as occurred in Bajaur Agency on October 30 (Reftel).  Officials add that developing enforcement infrastructure and capacity \"takes time.\"  Post continues to stress to the GOP that the difficulty of the proposition makes it all the more imperative that enforcement and capacity building begin immediately.  End Comment   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2006 8:46", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 021879  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2016 TAGS: AF, EAID, ECON, ETRD, IN, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF DETERMINED TO DEAL WITH BORDER AREAS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (S)  Summary:  In a November 7 meeting at his Army HQ office, President Musharraf told Asstsant Secretary Boucher that he would propose selective mining of the border with Afghanistan.  Saying that it is too early to judge whether the North Waziristan jirga agreement is a success, the President reaffirmed the government's determination to restore stability, halt creeping \"talibanization\" and cut-off cross-border support for the insurgency in Afghanistan. Although supportive of the concept of coordinated jirgas with Afghanistan, he expressed frustration with President Karzai's advocacy for a broad-based national gathering rather than proceeding with event narrowly focused on the Pashtun tribal lands along the Pak-Afghan border.   Musharraf also noted personal irritation that Karzai has not been proactive in repatriating fugitive Balochi militant leader who the Government of Pakistan asserts has safe haven in Kandahar. The President believes that Pakistan and India have come to agreement on texts resolving the Siachen Glacier and Sir Creek disputes, but that the Indian side is not willing to move forward.  Looking toward the mid-November Composite Dialogue talks in New Delhi, the President indicated that Pakistan expects the new counterterrorism mechanism to serve both Indian and Pakistani needs.  President Musharraf pressed for a bilateral Free Trade Agreement and was surprised to hear that negotiations on a Bilateral Investment Treaty have stalled.  End summary.  FATA and Border Strategy ----------------------------------- 2.  (S)  When asked for his assessment of the situation in Federally Administered Tribal Areas, the President opened by saying that it is still too soon to judge whether the North Waziristan Agency jirga agreement is working.  We know that cross-border insurgency continues, he offered as an example, and that \"talibanization\" is continuing in the agency. Despite challenges in implementing the agreement, Musharraf said that the North West Frontier Province Governor and his political agents must persevere, backing up the government's insistence that all sides live up to their obligations with force if necessary.  Power must be restored to the civil and tribal authorities (the political agents and maliks); the Governor has the Frontier Corps and levies at his disposal to ensure that this happens.  We need to give it more time, he concluded.  3.  (S)  The President characterized the October 30 air strike against a madrassa-cum-militant training camp as a good and necessary operation, even if it has prompted public outcry and media criticism.   The President sighed that the media consistently misses the point that a serious terrorist threat has been neutalized.   Assistant Secretary Boucher commended the Bajaur operation as a strong signal that Pakistan is willing to take military action against militant camps, a lesson that will not be lost on Taliban and other extremist elements elsewhere in Pakistan.  Musharraf agreed, saying that Governor Orakzai emphasized the point by sending a post-strike message to militants underscoring that the government will strike training camps and support facilities whenever they are discovered.   The President also took heart from the declaration of Bajaur tribal leaders in the days before the strike that they too wanted to enter into a North Waziristan-type agreement; it shows that many tribal members are tired of the instability and trouble that these militants have brought to their regions, Musharraf concluded.  4.  (S)  The President said that, at his meeting with the Army Corps commandes later in the day, he intended to raise the prospect of mining areas along the border to interdict cross-border traffic by anti-Coalition militants.  This is a sensitive issue, as it would interfere with traditional tribal easement rights, but one that the President indicated  ISLAMABAD 00021879  002 OF 003   was necessary.  Selective mining would help to channel cross-border traffic to lawful monitored crossing points. Both Assistant Secretary Boucher and Ambassador Crocker stressed the need to ensure that minefields were properly monitored to prevent resourceful enemy agents from digging up the mines and deploying them against Pakistani, Afghan and Coalition forces.  5.  (C)  Boucher briefed the President on developments in Washington since his September meetings with President Bush and other Administration leaders.  The State Department and other agencies have been working to identify funding to support the government's strategy for the tribal areas; although final numbers are not yet available, Boucher assured the President that our support would be substantial. Describing the findings of a feasibility study on Reconstruction Opportunity Zones, Boucher noted that a variety of potential products had been identified. President Musharraf asked about the potential for developing new industries in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and acknowledged that the legislative adjustments to tarriff rates give the zones concept a mid-term time horizon.  Jirgas and Afghanistan ----------------------------- 6.  (C)  President Musharraf said that the jirgas proposed at the September 27 trilateral dinner with Presidents Bush and Karzai are a good idea, but that Karzai is diluting their value by trying to pull everybody into the tent.  Why should Punjabis, Sindhis and Pahshiris be involved in a traditional Pashtun gathering intended to resolve security threats in the border regions, Musharraf asked.  Musharraf described his vision for these jirgas as instruments to bring peace to the people in the border areas, by soliciting tribal support against extremism and militancy.  We need these cooperative tribal leaders to guide us as we combat the Taliban and their doctrines, he said.  Boucher assured Musharraf that President Karzai shared the same core goals, but proposed expanded participation in order to give the tribal leaders the support of the rest of Afghan nation.  Confirming that the President has tasked Governor Orakzai to coordinate a Pakistan jirga, Boucher encouraged am early coordination meeting between Orakzai and his to-be-named Afghan counterpart soon, before Foreign Minister Kasuri and Foreign Minister Spanta meet in December.   He also reiterated Secretary Rice's offer of U.S. support, saying that Washington would look to Kabul and Islamabad for guidance on how the U.S. could best be helpful.  7.  (S)  Musharraf then shifted the discussion to what he described as a particular irritant in his relations with President Karzai.  Musharraf said that, some weeks ago, he has sent and Inter-Sevices Intelligence brigadier to Kabul with specific information on the location of Baloch militant Brahamdagh Bugti, who has absconded to Kandahar and is now in Kabul; similar information had simultaneously been conveyed through diplomatic channels.  (Note:  Brahamdagh is the grandson of Balochi sardar Nawb Akbar Bugtu , who was killed by the Pakistani military in August.  End note.)  In a telephone call two weeks later, President Karzai professed ignorance of the Pakistani request to repatriate Bugti. Musharraf said that he told Karzai that either the Afghan intelligence chief was withholding information from the President or Karzai simply did not have the will to act on the Pakistani information.    As Musharraf warmed to his topic, he alluded to Indian support to the rebellious Bugti tribe, blaming both the Bugtis and Indian intelligence agencies for a recent series of fatal bombings in Quetta and telling Boucher that he has sigint to prove Indian complicity.  Musharraf accused India of deploying intelligence resources from its Afghan consulates and reconstruction projects.  India needs to be told to stop these activities immediately, Musharraf said, or else Pakistan will be forced to take counter-measures.  (Note:  ISLAMABAD 00021879  003 OF 003   Musharraf said that the Director General - Inter-Services Intelligence will raise this issues in his Washington meetings this week, End note.)   Boucher noted that the U.S. felt that India has a role to play in Afghanistan's reconstruction, but that its activities in Afghanistan must be limited to reconstruction and humanitarian relief.  India ------ 8.  (C)  President Musharraf said that Pakistan would raise its concerns about Indian activities in Afghanistan and Balochistan when the Indian and Pakistani Foreign Secretaries meet in New Delhi next week for the Composite Dialogue. Commenting on the counterterrorism mechanism that he and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh had endorsed in September, Musharraf said that Pakistan is sincere in its offer to assist India's investigation of the July Mumbai train bombing.  The counterrorism mechanism, however, must be a two-way street; India must also be receptive to Pakistani concerns.  Reviewing the emerging picture of the Mumbai bombing, which appears to be the responsibility of a domestic Indian extremist entity and the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Tayyba.  Observing that Musharraf had banned Laskhar-e-Tayyba in 2002, Boucher suggested that the counterterrorism mechanism start from this point of commonality, as Lashkar is clearly a threat to both countries.  9.  (S)  Boucher sought the President's views on a Siachen deal.  We could sign a deal tomorrow, Musharraf said, and I have said as much to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. Musharraf asserted that a deal on Sir Creek was also within grasp, saying that he had personally proposed an arrangement that would declare the affected coastal areas a common zone for joint exploitation by both countries.  Saying that he understands that Prime Minister Singh wants to accept Pakistan's invitation to visit, Musharraf said that it is important that a significant deliverable accompany the visit.  Economic Relationship -----------------------------  10.  (C)  In the course of the discussion on the tribal areas, President Musharraf digressed to request that the U.S. initiate negotiations on a bilateral free trade agreement. Stating that Pakistan must balance a growing trade deficit by increasing exports in order to maintain its high growth rate, the President pressed hard for liberalizing trade relations with the U.S.  (Note:  Musharraf said that he had been told that the U.S. was negotiating a free trade agreement with Malaysia, suggesting that negotiations were also possible for Pakistan,  End note.)  Ambassador Crocker noted that, from the U.S. perspective, the appropriate order of business is to conclude negotiations on a Bilateral Investment Treaty before embarking on negotiations on a free trade agreement. Unfortunately, the Ambassador continued, the bilateral investment treaty negotiations have stalled, as the Pakistan side wishes to revisit issues that American negotiators thought resolved long ago.  President Musharraf was surprised to learn that the investment treaty talks had bogged down and promised to look into the situation.  11.  (U)  SCA/Caitlin Hayden has cleared this cable.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2006 11:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 021882  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2016 TAGS: MOPS, PK, PTER, PGOV SUBJECT: SUICIDE ATTACK IN MALAKAND AGENCY KILLS 35 PAKISTAN TROOPS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable contains an action request; please see para. 9.  2.  (C) Summary: At approximately 08:00 (local) November 8, a suicide attacker detonated a bomb at the front gate of Dargai Fort during morning exercises, killing himself and at least thirty five (35) Pakistani soldiers.  Given the serious injuries suffered by other casualties, the death toll is expected to rise.  This attack comes on the heels of an afternoon rocket volley on November 7 in Wana, South Waziristan, that disrupted Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) Governor Jan Orakzai's visit and caused his early return to Peshawar by helicopter.  While the attack in Wana appears to have been a political ploy to intimidate and interrupt an otherwise successful tour of North and South Waziristan over two days, the suicide blast at Dargai Fort may be retaliation against the Pakistani Military's October 30 Bajaur madrassa airstrike.  3.  (C)  This attack on a Punjab Regiment training center in Dargai -- the bloodiest single action against the Army outside of hostilities with India -- is a significant strike against the most visible symbol of state control in the troubled border region.  In light of the number of casualties and the potent symbolism of a successful attack on Pakistani security forces, post recommends that Department request high-level condolence messages from the White House to reaffirm U.S. support for Pakistan's commitment to defeating violent extremism in its tribal areas (see paragraph 9).  End summary.  Attack on Dargai ----------------  4. (C) Initial reports from Dargai Fort, a Pakistani Military base in the settled NWFP area of Malakand, stated that a motorcyclist peeling off from a morning crowd of school children detonated an IED during 8:00am morning exercises on unwalled parade grounds outside the primary fort compound. The fort, an infantry training area for the Punjab Regimental Center Mardan, is approximately two hours drive northeast of Peshawar.  Pakistani Military contacts confirm that the attacker arrived by motorcycle, then jumped off and ran into the front gates of the Fort's grounds before exploding the device.  He was not engaged by any of the soldiers standing guard at the gate.  An eyewitness placed the bomber at 15-20 years of age, and there is no word yet whether the bomb was a timed or command detonated device.  At least thirty-five (35) soldiers are confirmed dead; two reliable Consulate contacts claim that up to twenty (20) more civilians and/or military personnel were killed.  The injured are flooding into hospitals in Dargai, Mardan, and Peshawar.  Rockets fired at Governor's South Waziristan Gathering --------------------------------------------- ---------  5.  (C) The attack at Dargai fort comes one day after two rockets landed near a jirga site in Wana, South Waziristan, where NWFP Governor Jan Orakzai was delivering an address. Militants apparently fired rockets that flew overhead during introductory remarks and landed about 250 meters away from the jirga site.  The Governor was reportedly unfazed and finished his hour-long speech, but cancelled further engagements and flew by helicopter back to Peshawar.  The Governor's office maintains his visit was not cut short and  ISLAMABAD 00021882  002 OF 002   he returned to Peshawar on schedule.  However, Peshawar contacts and press reports say he had planned to visit a madrassa in Wana, address another meeting of elders, and dedicate a new portion of a school in Wana before departing.  6.  (SBU) While the press has sensationalized the Wana rocket fire as an assassination attempt on the Governor, his spokesman and Consulate contacts characterize the rocket fire as intimidation.  No one was killed in the initial attack, but later in the evening, five more rockets landed in and around the Frontier Scouts' camp, killing one Frontier Corps soldier.  In both instances, Scouts responded with 20-40 minutes of retaliatory fire into nearby hills, and they have reportedly detained seven alleged perpetrators of the attack.  7. (SBU) The Governor's visit to Wana was part of a broader tour of North and South Waziristan over November 6-7, in which he addressed tribal elders and lauded their implementation of the North Waziristan Agreement.  The Governor hailed it as a conflict-resolution model for the world to emulate in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Kashmir.  The visit to Wana was Orakzai's first as NWFP Governor.  Comment -------  8.  (C) Comment: The suicide bombing at Dargai Fort could be a retaliatory strike against the Pakistani Military's bombardment of the Zia-ul Uloom Taleemal madrassa-cum-militant training center in Bajaur Agency. While none have yet claimed responsibility for the attack, the physical and cultural proximity of Dargai Fort to Bajaur Agency and the clear targeting of a military base for a mass-casualty attack suggests such a linkage.  9.  (C)  Action Request:  Th Dargai attack is an assault on Musharraf's leadership in the war on terror and on his most important constitutency, the Army.  Both President Musharraf and Pak Mil need to know that the U.S. stands with them in the face of this direct assault on state authority.  The Office of the Defence Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) has already contacted the Army's Director General - Military Operations with a condolence message; CFC-A LTG Eikenberry intends to call Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan on Thursday.  Post strongly recommends:  -- a Presidential telephone call or message to President Musharraf that mourns the Pak Mil losses while commending Pakistan resolve to defeat this extremist threat; and  -- that the State Department spokesperson issue a statement of condolence and support at the daily press briefing. Post will provide recommended language to SCA/PPD separately.  10.  (U)   This cable was drafted in coordination with Consulate Peshawar. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD17547|06ISLAMABAD19193", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2006 8:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 021904  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PINR, PK SUBJECT: SUBJECT:  BALOCHISTAN -- PAST THE CRISIS?  REF: REF: A) ISLAMABAD 17547 AND PRIORS B) ISLAMABAD      17594 C) ISLAMABAD 19193  Classified By: AMBASSADOR RYAN C. CROCKER, REASONS: 1.4 (b) & (d).  1.  SUMMARY:  (C) In the ten weeks since Nawab Akbar Bugti was killed in an encounter with the Pak Army, the Government of Pakistan has moved on several fronts to defuse another \"nationalist\" uprising by Baloch tribals who feel increasingly marginalized in their own province.  Massive development packages targeting unemployment and social services, if they come to pass, may undercut some of the alienation felt by young Baloch men.  Meanwhile, a court decision may void many of the land grants to Punjabi investors and Pak-Mil officers who hoped to benefit from the Gwadar port project.  This could dilute Baloch complaints about \"outside settlers.\"  2. (C) Bugti,s sons are unlikely to inherit control over the Jamhoori Watan Party Bugti founded and led; the party itself is in disarray.  Other feudal lords (sardars) in Balochistan lack the standing Nawab Bugti enjoyed. President Musharraf,s on-again, off-again plan to hold a grand jirga, now scheduled for November 16, may further divide the sardars who feel threatened by the Army,s elimination of Bugti and disagree on how to move forward.  GOP claims that attacks on government and infrastructure targets in Balochistan have declined since the death Nawab Bugti appear to be correct, although Ramadan may have played a part in the decline. Bombings in Quetta since the end of Eid may indicate a return of the nationalist sponsored violence, although some observers suspect at least some of the incidents were the work of the Taliban or Al Qaeda.  END SUMMARY.  A REALLY BIG STICK....  3.  (SBU) The death of Nawab Akbar Bugti, sardar of the Bugti tribe, at the hands of the Pakistan Army on August 26 temporarily united the Baloch tribes against the government of Pakistan (ref A).  The September 21 grand jirga, called by the Khan of Kalat  -- hereditary leader of the Baloch -- was a province-wide protest against the death of Nawab Bugti and the continued \"colonial occupation\" of their lands by \"outsiders.\" (ref B).  4.  (C) The unity and rise in outspoken nationalism after Bugti,s death have dissipated as time passed.  His death gave the insurgents a new martyr, but it also cost them their most prominent spokesman.  His political party, the Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP) was a power in the province; it began to splinter while he was on the run, and virtually collapsed after his death.  Press contacts in Quetta claim military \"agencies\" are sewing dissent among JWP members in the provincial assembly -- some have already left the party -- and none of the Nawab,s three sons have the political acumen to assert control.  Meanwhile, the GOP,s continued crackdown on other Baloch insurgent groups seems to have greatly weakened those groups, capacities.  FOLLOWED BY THE PROMISE OF CARROTS  5.  (C) PM Shaukat Aziz traveled to Quetta on October 12 to promise a 19.5 billion rupee (USD 325 million) aid package to increase employment, develop infrastructure and provide social services in the province.  The press and many Baloch, while noting the government had made similar promises in the past, greeted the aid package announcement positively and said its implementation could do much to improve the government,s image in the province.  Meanwhile, the Quetta bench of the Supreme Court on October 21 cited \"glaring illegalities\" in the allotment of land grants around Gwadar and ordered a review of allotments made in the last five years.  Land prices around the port, which had fallen 50 percent during the two years of the Nawab,s standoff with the central government, fell an additional 50 percent after his death and are now 20-25 percent of their highs. Investment in the area will take some time to recover, but fewer Punjabi speculators coming into the area may reduce  ISLAMABAD 00021904  002 OF 002   Baloch fears they are losing their province to outsiders.  6.  (C) At the behest of Balochistan Governor Owais Ahmed Ghani, President Musharraf had planned to call and address a grand tribal jirga in Quetta on November 8, an event characterized in the press as a \"counter jirga\" to the Khan of Kalat,s conclave.  For unspecified reasons, but probably related to security, Musharraf,s jirga was first relocated to Islamabad, and now appears to be scheduled for November 16 in Gwadar.  Only sardars believed loyal to the government have been invited; there is some indecision among these sardars about attending, as none of their group had called for such an event.  Balochistan Chief Minister Yousuf specifically excluded Sardar Ataullah Mengal and Akhtar Mengal, major powers in the Balochistan National Party.  The press reports that Nawab Khair Bukhsah Marri and Nawab Bugti,s son Jamil were also not invited.  ------------ Comment ------------  7.  (C) For now, GOP administrative and political control of Balochistan appears to be increasing, and initial reaction to the planned development assistance indicates follow through on the package could go far to tamping down resurgent nationalism. The \"Presidential jirga\" is something of a risk for the GOP.  Only sardars can call a jirga, and only the Khan of Kalat can call a grand jirga for the Baloch. Nationalists say those who attend the Islamabad-organized jirga have \"no honor and dignity,\" a major insult in Baloch culture.  A press contact in Quetta reports that those who attend will be \"putting their lives at risk.\"  Musharraf,s Gwadar conclave must deliver real benefits to the Baloch (jobs and development) to have any hope of further dampening their nationalism. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2006 12:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 021931  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2016 TAGS: AF, MASS, MOPS, PK, PNAT, PREL SUBJECT: THE RIGA SUMMIT AND PAKISTAN  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  During Assistant Secretary Boucher's November 6-7 visit to Islamabad, post was struck by senior Pakistani officials' and politicians' pessimism over Afghanistan. Interlocutors repeatedly expressed concerns that the U.S. and NATO were not in Afghanistan for the long-haul.  While we know that USNATO has worked full-out to ensure that the Riga summit focuses on Afghanistan, we wish to emphasize the need to reassure Pakistan, Afghanistan, and other countries in the region that NATO is committed to success in Afghanistan. Both NATO and the USG must publicly and privately highlight NATO's resolve.  Post encourages NATO to focus on constructive ways to engage Pakistan on ISAF's goals for Afghanistan.  ------------------------------------------ November 6 Islamabad Meeting ------------------------------------------  2.  (C)  During a November 6 meeting in Islamabad of chiefs of mission from NATO troop-contributing countries, many of the ambassadors, including ambassador's from key countries, were under the impression the Riga summit would not adress Afghanistan in a major way.  While we have assured our colleagues that we understand that Riga will focus on Afghanistan, it would appear that this message is not reaching our allies' representatives from their own capitals and NATO delegations.  ------------------------- Two Places to Start ------------------------  3.  (C)  At the November 6 meeting, ambassadors agreed that NATO should invite President Karzai to Riga to demonstrate NATO's faith in -- and support for -- his leadership, as well as NATO's unwavering commitment to see the Afghanistan mission through to a successful end.  Photos of President Karzai standing shoulder-to-shoulder with the heads of state of 26 NATO member countries would send an invigorating and much-needed signal to nay-sayers who question NATO's resolve.  An early post-Summit visit by SYG de Hoop Scheffer to Pakistan and Afghanistan would provide an additional shot of adrenaline concerning NATO's commitment.  4.  (C)  Post very much appreciates all that USNATO has accomplished in ensuring that success in Afghanistan is center-stage in Riga.  Post also appreciates USNATO's tremendous efforts at keeping us informed of developments in NATO that could affect Pakistan.  We look forward to continuing to work together toward a successful summit -- and beyond.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE182262", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2006 2:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 021946  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/11/2016 TAGS: AF, EAID, ECON, ENRG, ETRD, MNUC, PARM, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: ASSISTANT SECRETARY BOUCHER'S NOVEMBER 6 MEETING WITH PAKISTANI FOREIGN SECRETARY KHAN  REF: STATE 182262  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  On November 6, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher met with Pakistani Foreign Secretary Riaz Mohammad Khan.  The two discussed the upcoming strategic dialogue, including the status of dialogues on energy, education, and science and technology.  Boucher previewed the U.S. study on Regional Opportunity Zones and assured our support for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas development plan and for the Frontier Corps.  Khan expressed his expectations for the upcoming composite dialogue discussions with India and his thoughts on the jirga process agreed to by Presidents Karzai and Musharraf.  Finally, Boucher noted again our disappointment in Paksitan's recent meeting with the Nuclear Suppliers Group; Khan was unrepentant.  End Summary  2.  (U)  On November 6, Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asia Richard Boucher called on Foreign Secretary Riaz Mohammad Khan of Pakistan. U.S. participants  SIPDIS included Ambassador Crocker, SCA Senior Advisor Caitlin Hayden, and notetaker.  Pakistan participants included Additional Secretary (Americas) Shahid Kamal and Director General (Americas) Sohail Mahmood.  3.  (C)  A/S Boucher and Foreign Secretary Khan opened with a tour d'horizon of key issues, most of which are part of the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue.  Khan stressed that, while the strategic dialogue had generated many good ideas, implementation should now be the priority.  --Economic Dialogue:  Khan was concerned that, if Pakistan signed the Bilateral Investment Treaty, the treaty's terms would \"ipso facto\" become applicable to the 40 other nations with whom they had treaties containing Most Favored Nations clauses.  He noted that including the Bilateral Investment Treaty in a free trade agreement would be more politically palatable in Pakistan.  Boucher replied that the U.S. had the opposite problem:  an investment treaty would be relatively uncontroversial, a Free Trade Agreement more complicated.  He added that the draft Pakistan treaty used standard language and that creating special language for Pakistan was not possible.  --Regional Opportunity Zones:  Kahn said he was looking forward to receiving a briefing on the study of the zones. Boucher replied that the study was substantially finished and was being circulated to various agencies in Washington.  The report would look at a broad range of products that could be produced in the zones and at likely locations for the industrial areas.  Defining the economic regulations surrounding the zones would be an important step.  --Assistance to Frontier Corps and Levies (tribal police): Khan said Pakistan was hoping to raise $300 million to hire and equip more Levies and Frontier Corps troops.  Improving capacity in these forces was important for both the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and for Balochistan.  Khan  noted that enlarging the two groups, besides enhancing security, would provide immediate economic benefits to the areas, as employment and income would increase.  Boucher replied that the U.S. military was working with Pakistan military to assess Frontier Corps capacities and challenges and would develop a plan based on that study.  He added U.S. officials desired to help the corps improve its capabilities.  --Federally Administered Tribal Areas Development:  Khan noted that the GOP was looking at a Federally Administered Tribal Areas development plan that would cost about USD 150 million per year for five years.  He described Federally Administered Tribal Areas residents as \"living in a time  ISLAMABAD 00021946  002 OF 004   warp\" that made them susceptible to many negative influences.  Boosting development and living standards in the area was the only way to provide an alternative to those influences. Boucher said the U.S. was working with Pakistan on the Federally Administered Tribal Areas development plan and was assembling a funding package.  While he still could not provide specific monetary figures, he noted he was looking for a variety of funding sources.  He added he was encouraging other countries to assist with the effort and was \"talking it up\" on his travels.  Ambassador Crocker commended the previous week's Federally Administered Tribal Areas conference as an effective way of \"getting the word out.\"  He said it had been particularly impressive that representatives from all the tribal agencies had attended.  --Science and Technology:  Khan noted that training and scholarships were key.  He said that Pakistan had announced a plan to build a series of new universities to enhance education around the country.  He anticipated about 1/3 of the higher education budget would be devoted to these new universities, while 2/3 would go toward improving existing higher education centers.  Boucher agreed education must be a prime area of cooperation.  The U.S. was investing $100 million per year in Pakistan's education system and the Pakistan Fulbright program was the largest in the world. That said, the U.S. wanted to concentrate on existing exchange programs rather than begin new ones. Boucher also noted the importance of not taking money from primary and secondary schools in order to build new universities.  --Energy:  Pakistan was interested in obtaining clean coal technology as well as renewable energy technology.  Boucher noted that the Energy Efficiency and Fossil Fuel bilateral groups would be meeting soon and could discuss these issues.  --Other topics:  Boucher noted the Embassy had delivered a draft Status of Forces Agreement text earlier in the day and that the U.S. looked forward to working toward an approved agreement for Pakistan.  --------------------------- Pak-Afghan Relations ----------------------------  3.  (C)   Khan reported that Pakistan was still developing goals for the parallel jirgas agreed to at the September 27 trilateral meeting of President Bush, President Musharraf and President Karzai.  He stressed that the jirgas should be effective, \"not just a spectacles.\"  The question facing jirga planners was how to use the meetings to reduce violence in Afghanistan.  To do that, the jirgas needed to involve \"people who mattered locally.\"  Khan said he would begin working on these questions in about a week, when the Foreign Ministry began preparing for Foreign Minister Spanta's visit to Islamabad in early December.  Boucher responded that, in addition to the to foreign ministers' meeting to discuss the jirgas, Pashtun organizers also needed to meet to plan the way forward.  The sooner Governor Orakzai began working with his Afghan counterpart, the better.  4. (C)  Khan said that President Musharraf was moving forward on his plan to fence the border and close refugee camps. The President believed both actions would improve security in Afghanistan.  Khan also stressed the need for \"real time\" intelligence sharing with Afghanistan.  \"We have cooperated when given the chance,\" he noted.  Boucher noted that the U.S. military was not convinced a border fence would be all that effective, given the particulars of the Pak-Afghan border.  5.  (C)  Khan assessed that problems in Afghanistan revolved around failure to achieve reconciliation between Pashtuns and non-Pashtuns since the end of the civil war.  He said the  ISLAMABAD 00021946  003 OF 004   reconstruction effort's failure to help many Afghans also encouraged violence and lawlessness.  Corruption, gun running, the narcotics trade, and the government's failure to reign in warlords made Afghans pessimistic about their futures.  People would not support a government that was not helping them, and there were limits to what Pakistan could do to solve Afghanistan's problems.  6.  (C)  Boucher noted that some problems facing Pakistan and Afghanistan were similar.  Both countries were attempting to extend government influence to the border.  The U.S. was working with the Karzai government to bring benefits of government, such as police, justice, and development, to Afghanistan's border areas.  We would continue working with Pakistan to counter Taliban influence in its border areas.  ------------ Pak-India ------------  7.  (C)  Foreign Secretary Khan was visiting India later in the week to work on resuming the Composite Dialogue.  He said both countries needed to acknowledge they had terrorism problems and needed to share intelligence.  He said the accusations of Pakistani intelligence involvement in the Mumbai bombing had sparked resentment in Pakistan, but that Pakistan was still pushing forward on sharing intelligence and had engaged in preliminary talks with India on the matter.  8.  (C)  Khan reported he was working on scheduling a date for a visit of the Indian Prime Minister to Pakistan.  He said India was insisting in firm deliverables first, where as Pakistan believed that committing to a meeting was the important first step. Pakistan was also working on resolving the Siachen Glacier dispute.  Boucher asked why India was resisting withdrawal.  Khan believed India did not wish to set a precedent of being willing to roll back from areas under their control.  He added that those in Pakistan who were pressing to regain forward momentum on talks with India were criticized as unrealistically optimistic, since \"India hasn't resolved any boundary problems with any neighbors. Bangladesh has 56 rivers in dispute.\"  Nevertheless, Khan was sure elements in the Indian establishment favored engagement with Pakistan and that those same Indians believed that progress on demilitarization would bring great benefits \"down the line.\"   Khan added that the process of confidence building would soon not be enough -- real progress was needed.  \"Progress is the best kind of confidence builder,\" he noted.  Boucher recommended that Pakistan raise issues it could reasonably expect the other side to act on.  He added that the U.S. was encouraging India to work toward progress on Siachen and Kashmir.  9.  (C)  Khan reviewed the list of cross-border trade concerns.  He said formal trade between India and Pakistan over the last two years had increased fromUSD 200 million to 800 million annually, mostly to the benefit of India. India's composite tariffs, which disproportionately affected low-priced goods, limited Pakistan's competitiveness. India's container regulations were also hurting Pakistan's export levels.  Khan then admitted that, while India was allowed to export to Afghanistan via Karachi port, Pakistan was not allowing overland trade from India into Afghanistan.  10.  (C)   Boucher explained that the U.S. thought opportunities for cross-border trade throughout South and Central Asia were significant.  Exporting hydro-electricity from Tajikistan through Afghanistan to Pakistan was one example of trade ties that could benefit many countries.  In order to increase regional trade, though, many countries needed to rationalize regulations on phyto-sanitary standards, drivers' licenses, and customs procedures.  Khan  ISLAMABAD 00021946  004 OF 004   added that, in Afghanistan, security on transport routes was key.  He said the global community needed to utilize the entire South Asian market in a way to encourage stability in Afghanistan.  -------------------------- Civil Nuclear Issues --------------------------  11.  (C)  Khan reported he had received Under Secretary Burns' letter concerning the recent Nuclear Suppliers Group meeting in Vienna and would respond.  Boucher said that the U.S. needed Pakistan's help on the U.S.-India civil nuclear agreement, and that Pakistan's demands for a criteria based system were hurting our efforts. Khan explained that his statements to the Nuclear Suppliers Group has stressed Pakistan's interest in access to nuclear power technology under any and all types of safeguards. Pakistan's requests were not meant to attack the U.S.-India civil nuclear agreement but were designed with the interests of Pakistan in mind.  Pakistan wanted a criteria-based decision making process for access to nuclear power generation.  Boucher replied that Khan was aware of the U.S. position, as explained in the letter from Under Secretary Burns (Reftel).  12.  (U)  This cable was coordinated with SCA - Caitlin Hayden. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2006 2:07", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 021947  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/11/2016 TAGS: AF, MASS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: BOUCHER AND KASURI COVER F-16S, JIRGAS, NORTH WAZIRISTAN AGREEMENT AND FENCING THE BORDER   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  On November 6, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher met with Foreign Minister Kasuri.  In the meeting, Kasuri asked for consideration on F-16 payments and previewed Pakistani thoughts on the joint jirgas announced after President Musharraf and President Karzai met in Washington.  Kasuri expressed frustration over Pakistan's being blamed for problems in Afghanistan and explained Pakisitan was committed to making the jirgas a success.  Each side had a different vision, and Assistant Secretary Boucher recommended that the two sides talk soon to find common ground.  Kasuri asked for the U.S. assessment on the North Waziristan Agency agreement and also explained Pakistan's intent to fence part of the border and possibly use mines, which Boucher cautioned against.  End Summary.  2.  (U)  On November 6, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher called on Pakistani Foreign Minister Mian Khurshid Mahmud Kasuri.  U.S. participants included Ambassador Crocker, South and Central Asian Affairs Executive Assistant Caitlin Hayden, and Embassy notetaker.  Government of Pakistan participants included Director General of the Foreign Minister's Office Khalid Mehmood, , Additional Secretary for Americas Shahid Kamal, and Director General for Americas Sohail Mahmood.  3.  (C)  Foreign Minister Kasuri opened by discussing the recently-signed Letter of Agreement to purchase 18 new F-16s.  Kasuri asked that terms be changed to allow the Government of Pakistan to pay for the aircraft upon delivery.  If that was not possible, the Government of Pakistan wished to back-load the payment schedule, so that most of the payments would not be due until nearer the delivery date. Additionally, the Government of Pakistan would be grateful for assistance securing a commercial loan and, if a commercial loan were not available, then some type of U.S. Government guarantees. The Government of Pakistan also wanted a promise of a full refund if the project were canceled for some reason.  Ambassador Crocker replied the U.S. was studying the possibility of back-loading payments within limits, subject to Lockheed-Martin's cash-flow requirements.  ------------------ Parallel Jirgas -----------------  4.  (C)  Foreign Minister Kasuri reported that Afghan Foreign Minister Spanta had telephoned to ask for a bilateral meeting in November to discuss the parallel jirgas.  Due to other commitments, early December was the best Kasuri could do. Before meeting with Spanta, Kasuri wanted to meet with \"all the key stakeholders\" in the jirga process.  Stressing the need for a successful enterprise, Kasuri said a jirga failure \"would be a disaster, because there would be no hope left.\" He said President Musharraf's plan to strengthen the tribal system should theoretically work, but money and development assistance would be the key.  5.  (C)  Kasuri strongly believed jirga participation should be limited to Pashtuns.  He hypothesized that President Karzai might be under political pressure to include non-Pashtuns, but Kasuri worried that non-Pashtun participation would change the character of the meeting. \"Afghanistan's problem is with the Pashtuns.  The jirga should not become a second National Assembly.\"  Assistant Secretary Boucher suggested that, while deciding  SIPDIS participation and geographic scope, Kasuri and Spanta could consider inviting non-Pashtuns as observers or guests.  6.  (C)  Kasuri did not want the United States to misunderstand Pakistan's insistence on limiting jirga  ISLAMABAD 00021947  002 OF 003   participation to Pashtuns.  He said the Government of Pakistan also wanted to increase contacts with non-Pashtuns in Afghanistan, especially those associated with the former Northern Alliance.  For example, Pakistan hoped to increase bilateral interaction with Speaker of the Afghan Assembly Yunus Qanooni, who led the Northern Alliance Delegation at the Bonn talks.  7.  (C)  Boucher encouraged the two Foreign Ministers to establish a jirga timeline and to discuss third party assistance or participation.  He knew the United Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan was involved.  He offered that the U.S. was ready to help and looked to the Afghans and Pakistanis to tell us how we might support them. Additionally, Pakistan and Afghanistan should decide on desired outcomes and should consider having Pakistan's jirga point-man, Northwest Frontier Province Governor Orakzai, meet with his Afghan jirga counterpart before the foreign ministers met.   --------------------------------------- Pakistan-Afghanistan Relations ---------------------------------------  8.  (C)  Kasuri said a Taliban victory in Afghanistan would be \"a disaster for Pakistan.  It would strengthen extremist Pashtuns.\"  He continued by oserving that failure to defeat the Taliban would \"lead to trouble all of the Muslim world, but especially in Pakistan.\"  Boucher replied that the United States believed the war in Afghanistan was \"definitely winnable.\"  Development and security projects were helping the situation.  Boucher admitted that some people in the region questioned the United States' staying power, because the U.S. left Afghanistan after the Soviets pulled out.  The United States was trying to prove through its budget commitments that the U.S. was committed to staying the course.  The February NATO summit in Riga and the European Union's seven year budget for Afghanistan also would indicate the Coalition's long-term intentions.  Kasuri replied that extremists in Iraq and Afghanistan were claiming that the United States was fed up with wars and would pull out if the Democrats did well in the November 7 election.  The Muslim world needed a signal that the United States remained committed to victory in Iraq.  Boucher assured Kasuri that both political parties were committed to success in Afghanistan and Iraq and to assisting the tribal areas of Pakistan.  9.  (C)  Kasuri expressed annoyance with Western observers blaming Afghanistan's security problems on Pakistan.  (\"We are fed up with allegations against us.\")  He believed that fencing the border might lessen the criticism, as it would prove Afghanistan's problems were not because of cross-border infiltration.  (\"Afghanistan's problems are in Afghanistan, not in Pakistan.\")  Kasuri also noted that some people in the United States thought that Pakistan was \"keeping the Taliban option open\" in case the Taliban retook Afghanistan.  He thought that fencing the border would prove Pakistan was not preparing to work with the Taliban in the future.  He suggested initially fencing a 70 kilometer section that had been particularly problematic, then extending the fence later.  He also suggested mining the border, though he noted \"the Europeans\" would be opposed to mines.  Boucher replied that the U.S. military was skeptical on the efficacy of fencing the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.  Kasuri replied that the Indians had fenced their border with Pakistan.  \"They wouldn't have done it if it didn't help.\"  Kasuri asked again if a fence might not be effective.  \"We thought your Bajaur operation was effective,\" replied Assistant Secretary Boucher.  10.  (C)  Kasuri said it \"was ridiculous\" to think that  ISLAMABAD 00021947  003 OF 003   Mullah Omar might be hiding in Quetta.  He also questioned news reports that attacks on Coalition forces near the Pakistan border had increased since the North Waziristan Agency jirga agreement.  Kasuri said his advisors believed attacks had not increased and that tribal elders were working to enforce the agreement.  He said the problem was that, since the North Waziristan Agency agreement  covered only that agency's part of the border, the government needed to move ahead with other jirga agreements covering, for example, South Waziristan Agency and Bajaur Agency.  Boucher replied that the United States so far believed the North Waziristan Agency agreement was not succeeding at lowering militant infiltration into Afghanistan but that it was still too early to tell.  Ambassador Crocker explained that Coalition forces tracked a substantial increase in cross-border incidents between the June North Waziristan Agency cease-fire and the September 5 jirga agreement.  Since then, attacks had remained at the same high level.  Boucher noted it was important for Pakistan to maintain the ability to carry out military operations and to keep pressure on tribal leaders to fulfill their agreements.  11.  (C)  Assistant Secretary Boucher said that all the parties faced \"two big problems\" in Afghanistan.  First, coalition partners had failed to provide the benefits of good governance -- roads, justice, police, development -- to many parts of Afghanistan.  \"We need to extend the benefits of good governance to them.\"  Second, the Taliban were able to use Pakistan for sustenance.  Even with fencing, Taliban would find a way to move back and forth across the border. \"You need a comprehensive strategy on the tribal areas. Pakistan needs to extend the authority of the government into the border areas and provide a way for residents there to participate in the international economy.  Fixing Pakistan won't fix Afghanistan, but we can't fix Afghanistan without fixing the problem on the Pakistan border.\"  12.  (C)  This cable was coordinated with SCA - Caitlin Hayden CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2006 2:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 021948  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  CORRECTED COPY -- SEE PARAGRAPH 1.  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2016 TAGS: AF, MASS, MOPS, PK, PNAT, PREL SUBJECT: THE RIGA SUMMIT AND PAKISTAN -- CORRECTED COPY, SEE PARAGRAPH 1.  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  AmEmbassy Kabul concurs with this telegram.  2.  (C)  During Assistant Secretary Boucher's November 6-7 visit to Islamabad, post was struck by senior Pakistani officials' and politicians' pessimism over Afghanistan. Interlocutors repeatedly expressed concerns that the U.S. and NATO were not in Afghanistan for the long-haul.  While we know that USNATO has worked full-out to ensure that the Riga summit focuses on Afghanistan, we wish to emphasize the need to reassure Pakistan, Afghanistan, and other countries in the region that NATO is committed to success in Afghanistan. Both NATO and the USG must publicly and privately highlight NATO's resolve.  Post encourages NATO to focus on constructive ways to engage Pakistan on ISAF's goals for Afghanistan.  ------------------------------------------ November 6 Islamabad Meeting ------------------------------------------  3.  (C)  During a November 6 meeting in Islamabad of chiefs of mission from NATO troop-contributing countries, many of the ambassadors, including ambassador's from key countries, were under the impression the Riga summit would not adress Afghanistan in a major way.  While we have assured our colleagues that we understand that Riga will focus on Afghanistan, it would appear that this message is not reaching our allies' representatives from their own capitals and NATO delegations.  ------------------------- Two Places to Start ------------------------  4.  (C)  At the November 6 meeting, ambassadors agreed that NATO should invite President Karzai to Riga to demonstrate NATO's faith in -- and support for -- his leadership, as well as NATO's unwavering commitment to see the Afghanistan mission through to a successful end.  Photos of President Karzai standing shoulder-to-shoulder with the heads of state of 26 NATO member countries would send an invigorating and much-needed signal to nay-sayers who question NATO's resolve.  An early post-Summit visit by SYG de Hoop Scheffer to Pakistan and Afghanistan would provide an additional shot of adrenaline concerning NATO's commitment.  5.  (C)  Post very much appreciates all that USNATO has accomplished in ensuring that success in Afghanistan is center-stage in Riga.  Post also appreciates USNATO's tremendous efforts at keeping us informed of developments in NATO that could affect Pakistan.  We look forward to continuing to work together toward a successful summit -- and beyond.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2006 10:39", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 021968  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2016 TAGS: PREL,  PTER,  ECON,  ETRD,  EINV, OPIC, MNUC, AF,  PK SUBJECT:  ASSISTANT SECRETARY BOUCHER'S MEETING WITH PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER AZIZ:  A \"MARSHALL PLAN\" FOR AFGHANISTAN, NO MORE BAJAURS  Classified By:  Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  1.    (C)  Summary:  On November 7, Assistant Secretary Boucher met with Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz.  Aziz discussed the political situation, remarking that the Bajaur incident had played into the hands of the religious opposition, and that the mood of the general populace was truly angry.  He repeatedly stressed the serious, deteriorating nature of the situation in Afghanistan, advising the U.S. to act quickly via a \"Marshall Plan,\" and to engage other countries, particularly the Gulf States, at the highest levels.  His government is moving forward on the amendments to the Hudood Ordinance and on border security, and asserts its right to lobby for civil nuclear technology.  The Prime Minister asked for U.S. support for the Pakistan Infrastructure Fund, and hinted that they may purchase more Boeing aircraft. He also suggested that we look to his speech at Princeton University later in the week as a major policy speech for Pakistan.  End Summary  2.  (U)  On November 7, Boucher, accompanied by Ambassador Crocker, Senior Advisor Hayden, and Econ Counselor (note taker), met with Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz.  Khalid Saeed, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister; Zameer Akram, Additional Secretary, Prime Minister's Secretariat; Shahid Kamal, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and Mamoona Amjed, Additional Press Secretary; were also present.  3.  ( C)  Domestic Politics:  The Prime Minister said that political reform was going well.  The current government was moving into its final year, with elections expected late next year.   \"We are getting geared up [for the elections]; we will go in as a coalition.\"  He indicated that initially the Pakistan Muslim League had hoped to engage with more parties, but had encountered opposition from their own supporters, particularly on the issue of past corruption.  The religious parties were looking for issues to rally the people, he said, but they did not have a credible program to offer.  The poverty level has declined from 35 percent to 24 percent under the present government, although he acknowledged that many people had not felt it directly, especially in rural areas.  The education system and skills levels had deteriorated, he said, and, while the government is responding with crash programs, more is needed.  The thrust of the government's message is, \"if you want more of this, support us.\"  4.  (C)  Aziz expressed concern about the impact of Bajaur on the government's credibility and the ability of the religious parties to increase their franchise.  \"Bajaur has damaged us.  We can't sustain one more incident like this.  In the drawing rooms of Pakistan, everyone is discussing this and they are not convinced by what we [the government] have told them.\"  5.  (C)  Hudood Ordinance:   In response to a question from Boucher, the Prime Minister said that the government believed it should push ahead with amending the Hudood Ordinances, as this will help move the gender issue forward and nothing in the amendments violates the Koran.  The mullahs were using Hudood as an issue, he said, acknowledging that even within his own party there were differing views.  He did not seem concerned with the prospect of members of his own coalition resigning from Parliament, noting that by-elections can take place.  6.  (C)  Afghanistan - More Must be Done:  Aziz said he had met the previous day with Afghan Finance Minister Ahady.   \"The Afghans are feeling disenfranchised, and the very dangerous nexus between terrorism and drug money is growing more than people realize.\" There is also a tide of rising nationalism opposed to the presence of foreign troops.  He said that, if the Taliban's influence continues to increase, Afghanistan would be the biggest loser, followed by Pakistan.  The Prime Minister had several suggestions for the United States on how to remedy the deteriorating situation: -- Engage the visible stakeholders (Pakistan) as well as the invisible stakeholders (Iran, Russia) at all levels, many of which are active in Afghanistan in order to embarrass the U.S. and the coalition and are much more dangerous that the world realizes. -- Establish a very broad-based \"Marshall Plan\" for Afghanistan,  ISLAMABAD 00021968  002 OF 002   soliciting funding from a variety of sources, including China and Japan.  The Prime Minister urged the U.S. to apply pressure (\"soft arm-twisting\") on the royal families in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Qatar for additional funding. -- Bring in UN peacekeepers.  Boucher responded that the U.S. was gearing up for a major effort to improve governance and services in the South, and that the EU and NATO were fully engaged.  7.  (C)  Border Security:  Pakistan is ready to move on improving security in the \"porous, undermanned, treacherous\" border areas.  The government intends to fence and mine selected areas.  The Prime Minister had spent a few days in Quetta recently, where there are reportedly 500,000 refugees from Kandahar.  The refugee camps provide a safe haven for militants who form alliances with local religious elements.  \"We want the camps closed,\" Aziz stated emphatically.   He also met with all 1200 Balochi sardars, who told him unanimously that they wanted peace and opposed a Taliban presence in Quetta.  8.  (SBU)  Reconstruction Opportunity Zones:  The Prime Minister said he had been updated, and his only concern was that the zones should be moving faster.  Boucher explained the need for legislation before the zones could be implemented.  Prime Minister Aziz said, although he had heard of Afghan reservations about the zones, he had spoken with President Karzai when he was in Jalalabad recently to inaugurate a Pakistan-financed road, and the Afghan president had given him \"carte blanche\" regarding the zones and was very positive about their job creation aspects.  9.  (C)  Civil Nuclear Cooperation:  The Prime Minister clarified Pakistan's position on access to nuclear technology.   The country's energy needs were growing 8-12 percent annually, and nuclear power could play a critical role in meeting this requirement.  \"We are not happy with the U.S.-India nuclear deal, and we have every right to ask, demand, solicit and lobby for our case.\"  Boucher said the agreement with India was not criteria based, and Pakistan's lobbying the Nuclear Suppliers' Group for a different outcome was inconsistent with commitments made by President Musharraf and Foreign Minister Kasuri in Washington.  10.  (SBU)  Miscellaneous:  The Prime Minister asked for U.S. support for the Pakistan Infrastructure Fund (based in London), which he said the Overseas Private Investment Corporation had been investigating. He noted that OPIC and the U.S. Export-Import Bank had been very helpful to Pakistan and said that the government was considering buying more Boeing 777 aircraft.  11.  (U)  This cable was coordinated with SCA - Caitlin Hayden. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/15/2006 11:26", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 021999  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2016 TAGS: KNNP, MCAP, PREL, PK, IN SUBJECT: UPCOMING PAKISTANI BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S/NF)  On November 15, 2006, MFA Director General (Disarmament Cell) Khalilullah Qazi called PolCouns to advise that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) will conduct a test of a ground-based surface-to-surface ballistic missile.  The launch window is November 16-20, 2006.  Per existing agreements with India, Qazi said that the GOP has already notified New Delhi of this test.  Qazi indicated that Pakistan has advised other neighboring capitals of the test, including Beijing. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD21073|06KABUL5218|06KABUL5270", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2006 10:40", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 022023  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  DEPT - PLEASE PASS TO EUR/PRM KABUL - PLEASE PASS TO CFC-A  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2016 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK-AFGHAN JIRGAS:  PRESIDENTIAL CHIEF OF STAFF RESPONDS TO AFGHAN NON-PAPER  REF: A. KABUL 5270      B. ISLAMABAD 21073      C. KABUL 5218  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary and introduction:  In a October 30 meeting, Presidential Chief of Staff Hamid Javaid shared with Ambassador a non-paper passed to Government of Pakistan (GOP) from the Government of Afghanistan (GOA) via the UN Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).   Javaid noted that the GOP envisioned something quite different from the description in GOA paper when President Musharraf agreed to the parallel jirgas during the September 27 Trilateral Iftar at the White House.  Javaid also questioned why the GOA elected to pass the paper via UNAMA, rather than through bilateral diplomatic channels, stating that the two governments need to deal with each other directly to reconcile their diverging views of the jirga process.  End summary and introduction.  2.  (C)  The Ambassador opened his call on Javaid by noting that the GOA is under the impression that the GOP does not/not want to move forward with the two jirgas discussed at the Trilateral Iftar hosted by President Bush. (Ref C) Javaid responded that this was not true:  the GOP remains ready and willing to engage the GOA on the jirga proposal. He suggested that the two sides engage in planning sessions to consider the most appropriate parameters and timing to ensure a successful outcome.  3.  (C)  Having expressed Pakistan's support for the jirga concept, Javaid said that an Afghan non-paper on jirga organization (text in para. 8) had been delivered by UNAMA D/SRSG Chris Alexander delivered to National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz.  The non-paper proposed a much larger, broader gathering than that contemplated by the GOP.  The GOA appears to be committing to a large-scale, all-encompassing event drawing participants from the central government and all Afghan provinces.  Such a scope would be inappropriate in Pakistan, which intended to draw participants from only from geographic areas populated by Pashtun tribes -- i.e., along the Pak-Afghan border.   Rather than focusing on Pashtun tribal leadership, Javaid said that Kabul appears to want a to use the jirgas as a grand modern-day state-to-state darbar.  4.  (C)  According to Javaid, the asymmetries between the Pakistani and Afghan visions for the jirgas extends beyond the breadth of participation.  In response to a question by the Ambassador, Javaid affirmed that President Musharraf had asked NWFP Governor Orakzai to coordinate and implement the jirga on the Pakistani-side.  The GOP subsequently learned that President Karzai had appointed FM Spanta to coordinate the Afghan jirga, which would require Pakistan to shift at least some aspects of jirga planning to the MFA to maintain parity; unfortunately, as the MFA is staffed by Pakistanis of all ethnic backgrounds, finding an appropriate Foreign Office interlocutor with the requisite knowledge of Pashtun customs could be a challenge.  These are matters that the sides should discuss directly before proceeding further, Javaid concluded.  5.  (C)  Comment:  The GOA non-paper describes \"joint jirgas\" that reach far beyond the leaders of the Pashtun tribes that span the Durrand Line -- the concept that the GOP carried home from the White House Trilat Iftar.  Without dwelling on any particular issue, Javaid expressed minor annoyance that the GOA non-paper views jirga details as settled matters,  ISLAMABAD 00022023  002 OF 003   rather than as propositions for GOP consideration.  Javaid betrayed the same irritation displayed by other Pakistani interlocutors in reaction to perceived GOA overreaching. For example, on question of who would represent Pakistan at the Afghan jirga, it appears that the GOA intends for the GOP delegation to include all participants in the Pakistani jirga; presumably, the GOA would want the GOP to extend reciprocal invitations to all 180-200 participants in the Afghan jirga, a prospect that may daunt even the most hospitable GOP host.  The GOA non-paper declares that President Karzai has solicited the assistance of UNAMA in organizing the jirgas (emphasis on the plural, indicating both the Afghan and Pakistani events), presenting the GOP with a de facto third-party facilitator without prior consultation.  While not knowing what additional messages the D/SRSG may have personally delivered to NSA Tariq Aziz, post believes that the GOA would have solicited a more positive reaction had it pulsed the GOP reaction to using UNAMA as an emissary and interlocutor.  6.  (C)  Comment (cont):   The GOA non-paper unfortunately arrived as the GOP is trying to contain public reaction to the security operations against an extremist madrassa in Bajaur Agency.  Also, President Karzai's personal outreach to ANP leader Asfandyar Wali Khan and JUI-F leader Maulana Fazl ur-Rehman has drawn media attention, prompting public grumbling about perceived Afghan meddling in Pakistan's internal affairs.  While post is encouraged by Emb Kabul's report that President Karzai reached out directly to President Musharraf with an Eid telephone call (Ref A), The USG must encourage both sides to begin direct discussion of their jirga options as soon as possible.  End comment.  7.  (C)  Text of GOA Non-Paper:  (Begin text.)  Jirgas on Security in Afghanistan and Pakistan  Current Status of Initial Planning  -- The purpose of these jirgas is to generate structured discussion and decisions by national political and civil society leaders from both countries of measures to end terrorism as a major factor fueling insecurity in the region.  -- The Government of Afghanistan is planing to host the first joint jirga will full Pakistani participation before the end of 2006.  -- The current proposed composition of the Afghan jirga is as follows:  Speakers and Vice Speakers of the Meshrano and Wolesi Jirgas (6) Chairs of Wolesi Jirga Commissions (18) Chairs of Meshrano Jirga Commissions (18) Chairs of Provincial Councils (34) Members of the Ulema Council of Afghanistan (34) Two respected elders or representatives from each province (68) Further Parliamentary, political, women's or civil society representatives (10 ) Total Afghan participants:  180 - 200 Total Pakistani participants: (to be determined)  -- In addition, the President of Afghanistan and two Vice  ISLAMABAD 00022023  003 OF 003   Presidents would participate.  The members of the cabinet (25) would take part as observers, as would representatives of UNAMA and the international community.  -- President Karzai is currently considering several candidates for membership in an organizing committee for the Afghan jirga, but they have not yet been selected.  -- National regional and tribal balance will be respected and preserved but it is not now anticipated that additional representation to be given to border provinces.  -- President Karzai intends to invite President Musharraf and the members of the Pakistani jirga to participate in the Afghan jirga.  It has not yet been determined whether the presidents would preside, participate or observe.  -- President Karzai has asked UNAMA to assist the Afghan government with the preparations and monitoring of the jirgas.  -- Exact timing and location have not yet been determined. Given that security is the primary issue, the most probable feasible locations in Afghanistan are Jalalabad and Kandahar.  Kabul is also an option.  (End text.)     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06PESHAWAR653|06PESHAWAR659|06PESHAWAR662|06PESHAWAR664", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2006 11:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 022024  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2016 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: VOX POPULI:  REACTIONS TO BAJAUR MADRASSA ATTACK AND SUBSEQUENT DARGAI ARMY BASE BOMBING  REF: A. PESHAWAR 664      B. PESHAWAR 662      C. PESHAWAR 659      D. PESHAWAR 653  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  The Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) public remains exercised over the October 30 Pak-Mil attack on an extremist madrassa in Bajaur Agency and the November 9 retaliatory suicide bombing at Dargai Fort.  In the rest of Pakistan, neither event has resonated outside of the community of intellectual elites, the military and the mullahs.  Mainline Pakistani political parties worry that the Bajaur attack may be a potent issue for the religious parties in national elections later in the year; intellectuals are concerned that Bajaur was a form of extra-judicial punishment.  Some military and ISI contacts report that their colleagues have been hit hard by the Dargai bombing (which killed 42 Army recruits) and are starting to complain about the costs of  \"a war that is not Pakistan's war.\"  Such sentiments are unlikely to affect decision-making in the highly-centralized Pak-Mil bureaucracy, but the Dargai attack could make  officials particularly sensitive to complaints that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) \"could do more\" in the War on Terror. The United States should continue to affirm our appreciation for GOP commitments and sacrifices.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Outside of the NWFP, the October 30 attack on an extremist madrassa that served as a militant training camp in Bajaur Agency generated less public outcry than initially expected.  Conversely, the subsequent suicide bombing of an Army training facility for new recruits in Dargai, NWFP -- an attack that killed 42 young men -- also failed to generate widespread angst or public calls for retaliation.  Among the educated elites, both events are being debated in living rooms and in the English language press.  Consulates Karachi and Lahore nonetheless confirm Embassy Islamabad's impression -- except as noted in paragraph 3, neither incident has garnered much popular attention outside of NWFP, where the attacks remain emotional issues.  A telling point is that the Jamaat-i Islami (JI) had some success calling a few hundred supporters to the streets in NWFP to protest the air strike, but did not bother to organize public demonstrations in Lahore, where its highly-active, highly-organized student wing dominates campus politics at the local universities.  ------------------------------- In Salons and Reading Rooms ------------------------------  3.  (C)  Pakistani elites -- particularly those who talk with the Embassy and those who publish English language newspapers -- continue to debate the Bajaur attack on both moral and political terms.  Several have described the Bajaur air strike as a form of extrajudicial punishment.  Embassy and Consulate contacts argue that a ground assault on the madrassa, in which militants could be arrested and tried in court would have been preferable.  The logistical difficulties in carrying out such an operation -- and the concomitant hazards to Pak-Mil troops -- have not been part of the conversation.  ConGen Karachi reports that contacts there are asking whether a less confrontational, \"more Pakistani,\" approach to dealing with miscreants might have been more successful and less costly in terms of collateral  ISLAMABAD 00022024  002 OF 003   damage.  Similarly, Pakistani People's Party - Sherpao (PPP-S) leader Sikander Sherpao told Peshawar PO on November 13 that peace accords, like the September 5 North Waziristan Agency agreement, would be more effective at marginalizing militants than violent attacks.  4.  (C)  While some elites focus on rule-of-law issues, others keep an eye on the political.  Mainstream politicians worry that Bajaur will strengthen religious parties, particularly in NWFP.  Such concerns were raised by many of the mainstream political party representatives who attended a November 7 dinner in honor of visiting SCA Assistant Secretary Richard Boucher.  Despite worries that Bajaur and  SIPDIS Dargai would strengthen religious parties, the PPP and Pakistani Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) have been quick to join with the Mutihida Majlas-e-Amal (MMA) to criticize the Bajaur attack.  On November 14, opposition parties in the Senate -- including the PPP, PML-N and MMA -- submitted a joint request to devote a session to debating the Bajaur and Dargai events.   Perhaps more telling is that the political opposition reacted to the suicide bombing at the Dargai Army base by issuing point-scoring statements blaming the Musharraf-Aziz government -- rather than the extremist perpetrators -- for the attack.  ---------------------------------- Meanwhile, on the Frontlines. . . . ----------------------------------  5.  (C)  On the margins of the November 11 ISAF-Afghan-Pak-Mil Tripartite Commission Plenary, a mid-level Pak-Mil Army officer assigned to General Headquarters wondered whether Bajaur had been \"worth it,\" telling poloff this question was being quietly debated within the officer corps.  He said some officers were questioning whether the loss of 42 young soldiers in a single attack was a justifiable in a war \"that is not our war.\"  On November 14, an ISI operations officer told poloff that his colleagues were asking the same questions.  \"Seeing those boys die was painful for us,\" he said.  Pakistan's Ambassador to Afghanistan, who also attended the Tripartite Commission Plenary Session, told poloff the West had established and strengthened religious extremists on the Pak-Afghan border during the anti-Soviet jihad and now had unrealistic expectation about how quickly they could be contained.  \"We are the ones paying for your decisions of 30 years ago,\" he said.  While retired officers publishing letters in national newspapers have been quick to decry the lack of physical security at Dargai, they also have complained that the Government should have known that retaliation to Bajaur would be painful and asked whether it would be worth it.  6.  (C)  Comment:  Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan (ODRP) notes that it is not surprising that the officer corps, who were genuinely pained by Dargai, is debating the precipitating event.  Power and decision making authority in the Pakistan military is concentrated at the very top, and the concerns of more junior officers normally do not affect the decision making processes.  That said, it is reasonable to assume that GOP civilian and military officials --at the best of times defensive over suggestions that Pakistan could do more the War on Terror -- will be even more sensitive to such criticism since Dargai.  End Comment.  ------------------ And in the NWFP  ISLAMABAD 00022024  003 OF 003   ------------------ 7.  (C)  Consulate Peshawar reports that public opinion on the Bajaur strike was molded by early reporting that characterized the Pak-Mil operation as an attack on a \"religious school\" that was full of \"young children.\"  The angry rhetoric of local politicians and the absence of a strong and coordinated message from Islamabad in the first hours after the operation reinforced negative public perceptions that have been difficult to overcome.  The Consulate adds that the suicide bombing at Dargai may have blunted some of the public anger over Bajaur, reporting that Dargai has caused some in the NWFP to revise their opinion of the activities and associates of the \"madrassa.\"  ---------- Comment ----------  8.  (C)  Comment:    Emboffs and other non-Pakistani observers have quietly shared their surprise over the secular opposition's rush to blame the deaths of 42 soldiers at Dargai on the government, rather than on the extremist terrorists who carried out the attack.  Without discounting the passionate op-eds on the Bajaur airstrike and Dargai suicide bombing that have filled local newspapers, it is equally striking that neither Bajaur nor Dargai has resonated deeply enough in the general population to produce much in the way of public demonstration or street-level outcry. While the PPP, PML-N, and MMA have tried to score political points through their responses to the Bajaur and Dargai attacks, their attempts so far have fallen flat.  Similarly, outside of military circles, outrage over the Dargai tragedy have been muted...perhaps out of shock that militants could and would directly target the core of central government authority.  While theories on why the public has been so quiet abound, no one we speak with believes that a sea change is imminent.  Had the optics been different, or if the religious parties were not still recovering from financial and political backlash following the violent and destructive \"Danish cartoon\" riots in February 2005, we could have witnessed much noisier reactions to these incidents. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD16421|06ISLAMABAD21222|06ISLAMABAD21882|06PESHAWAR653", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2006 12:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 022025  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/14/2016 TAGS: CASC, ECON, KCRM, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER SHERPAO ON HIGH PROFILE TERROR CASES, IPR AND MISSING AMCIT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 21222      B. PESHAWAR 653      C. ISLAMABAD 21882      D. ISLAMABAD 16421  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  In a November 13 meeting, the Ambassador and Interior Minister Sherpao reviewed U.S.-Pakistani cooperation on the investigation into the 2006 Karachi Consulate bombing.  Sherpao assured the Ambassador that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) is committed to defending the conviction of Omar Saeed Sheikh for the 2002 murder of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl.  The Minister re-affirmed that government plans to charge the leader of a Punjab-based militant organization under the Security of Pakistan Act, but said that the arrest would be delayed until later in November.  Sherpao was receptive to the Ambassador's suggestion that his Ministry establish a dedicated intellectual property rights unit in the Federal Investigative Agency (FIA), but did not respond to the Ambassador's query regarding the whereabouts of missing AMCIT Dr. Sardar Sarki.  End summary.   FBI Cooperation ---------------  2.  (C)  The Ambassador opened the conversation by previewing the November 17 visit of FBI Director Robert Mueller to Islamabad and reviewing the status of FBI cooperation with the GOP on several high-profile terrorism cases.  Minister Sherpao indicated that arrangements would soon be made to allow Embassy LEGAT officers access to two suspects in the March 2006 Karachi Consulate bombing.  Sherpao noted that the third suspect in the case -- Qari Zafar, believed to be the mastermind behind the attack -- has absconded to North Waziristan Agency.  According to the Minister, police authorities came close to capturing Zafar during the recent Eid-al-Fitr holiday; investigators continue to follow his trail.  The Ambassador was pleased to hear that investigators are pursuing Zafar vigorously, both to bring him to justice and for his potential value as a source of information regarding this sophisticated terror attack.  Sherpao also volunteered that the Ministry should be able to arrange for LEGAT officers to have access to Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) reports before Director Mueller's arrival.  Omar Saeed Sheikh -----------------  3.  (C)  The Ambassador asked about the status of the case against Omar Saeed Sheikh, who was convicted in the kidnapping and murder of Daniel Pearl in 2002.  The Ambassador stressed that the U.S. shares the GOP's determination that Sheikh not escape justice through some legal loophole and observed that there are two active indictments against Sheikh pending in U.S. courts,  Sherpao assured the Ambassador that an interagency team comprising MOI, the Law Ministry and the National Police Bureau is following this case closely.  The GOP has engaged a special prosecutor, Raja Quereshi -- a well-regarded criminal lawyer and former provincial Attorney General -- to handle the case, which is currently on appeal.  Authorities have been carefully monitoring Sheikh's activities in prison, shifting him between high-security facilities in order to prevent him from enlisting assistance or support from fellow inmates or  ISLAMABAD 00022025  002 OF 003   prison employees.  Sherpao acknowledged the Ambassador's comments that the U.S. would be eager to discuss transferring Sheikh to face prosecution in American courts if it appeared that he might win his current appeal, but declined to respond directly to the offer, saying that he is confident that the Pakistani conviction would hold and that Sheikh would be executed as sentenced. (Note: According to Sherpao, the interagency team guiding the GOP's prosecution of Sheikh has also been tasked with reviewing all high-profile terror cases, traveling to each province to review files and offer guidance to local prosecutors.  Sherpao said that the Chief Justice of the Pakistan Supreme Court has convened provincial Criminal Investigation Division (CID) Inspectors General and Home Secretaries to coordinate enhanced training and support for judges presiding in terror-related cases.  The outreach is intended to stiffen the judges' resolve in the face of potential intimidation and to reduce procedural delays.  End note.)   Hafiz Saeed ----------- 4.  (C)  The Ambassador also questioned Sherpao about the GOP case against Lashkar-e-Tayyba/Jammat ud-Dawa (LeT/JuD) leader Hafiz Mohammad Saeed.  (Ref A)  Sherpao repeated his earlier assurance that Saeed would be re-arrested, this time under the Security of Pakistan Act.  Heightened domestic sensitivities following the October 31 Pak Mil air strike on a militant madrassa in Bajaur (Ref B) and the apparent retaliatory suicide attack on an Army training facility in Dirgai (Ref C) argued against proceeding against Saeed immediately, Sherpao said.  He predicted that Saeed would be taken into custody again following the November 20 (?) visit of UK Prime Minister Blair to Pakistan.  In the meantime, security agents are closely monitoring Saeed's activities.  Intellectual Property Rights ----------------------------  5.  (C)  The Ambassador commended the MOI for its cooperation with the Embassy in building local capacity to protect intellectual property rights (IPR), noting that the U.S. has developed an excellent relationship with FIA personnel enforcing IPR laws.  The U.S. is willing to commit additional resources toward capacity building, but suggests that the FIA first establish a dedicated IPR unit so that newly-trained personnel are not transferred to non-IPR duties.  The Minister called this a sensible suggestion and asked his staff to follow up with the Embassy.   Missing Amcit -------------  6.  (C)  The Ambassador raised ongoing U.S. concern for the welfare of AMCIT Dr. Sardar Sarki, who disappeared from his home in Karachi in February 2006. (Ref C)  A credible report in a respected Pakistani news magazine supports the belief of Dr. Sarki's family that he is in the custody of Pakistani security forces.  The Embassy is not taking a position on possible GOP charges against Sarki, the Ambassador said, but we need to know where he is and to have consular access to him.  Minister Sherpao listened to the Ambassador's remarks without comment.     ISLAMABAD 00022025  003 OF 003   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD20385|06ISLAMABAD22026|06STATE148119", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2006 12:01", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 022026  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2016 TAGS: KAWC, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP REQUESTS REPATRIATION OF GTMO AND BAGRAM DETAINEES  REF: A. STATE 148119      B. ISLAMABAD 20385  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  This cable contains action requests; please see paragraphs 4 and 5.  2.  (C)  In early November, POL received a copy of an MFA note verbale dated 12 October 2006 requsting the repatriation of six (6) Paksitani nationals currently in custody in the detention facilities at Guantanamo Bay, as well as those Pakistani nationals currently in U.S. custody in Afghanistan, and to share evidence against each detainee to enable the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to process these individuals upon their return to Pakistan.  3.  (C)  Background:  Following the August 8-10 visit by Ministry of Interior (MOI) officers to GTMO, PolCouns had been told that the MOI had forwarded text requesting detainee repatriation to the MFA.  PolCouns inquired at the MOI and MFA about the status of the GOP request several times over the course of the following weeks.  During an October 20 meeting, MFA (Americas) Director General Sohail Mehmood advised PolCouns that MOI LTC  Imran Yacuub would serve as the GOP's point-of-contact for all future detainees transfers (Ref A); Mehmood also said that a note verbale requesting repatriation of all detainees had been sent to the Embassy the previous week.   When no note arrived at the Embassy by early November, POL requested that the MFA fax a copy to the Embassy for transmission to WashDC.   (Note: The note verbale is reproduced in full in para. 6.  End note.)  4.  (C)  Action request:  Post requests Department guidance on a response to the GOP request for repatriation of all GTMO and Bagram detainees.  5.  (C)  Action request:  Post has coordinated the repatriation of Pakistani detainees in the past, most recently in October 2006 (Ref B).   POL will continue to serve as the Embassy point-of-contact, but requests front channel notice of the individuals to be transferred at least one week before the proposed transfer date.  This advance notice will allow POL adequate time to coordinate with MOI regarding confirmation of the detainees' nationality and to assure that appropriate arrangements have been made to process the detainees upon arrival in Pakistan.   Post also requests that the cable include names and contact information for military points-of-contact responsible for the detainees' custody and transfer to Pakistan, so that post is able to coordinate logistical arrangements and flight clearances for the detainees' transport.  6.  (SBU)  Text of October 12  note verbale:  (Begin text.)  No. USA-2/16/2006  12 October 2006  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad and has the honour to state that a two member Pakistani delegation visited Guantanamo Bay (GTMO) from 8 August to 10 August 2006 for consular access to Pakistani prisoners at Guantanamo Bay.  During the visit, the delegation met with officials of the U.S. Department of State and Defence, including Admiral Harry B. Harris Jr. Force Commander Taks Force, GTMO, Director Joint Intelligence Group, Director Criminal Investigation Task Force, Director FBI GTMO and Director Interrogation Control GTMO.  The delegation received briefings on each detainee prior to consular access.  The delegation confirmed the total number of Pakistani detainees at GTMO as 06.  The Pakistani delegation in its meeting wth U.S. officials conveyed that the Government of Pakistan was of the view that detainees pose no threat to U.S. interests and hence should be repatriated to Pakistan.  Further, any evidence available about each detainee may be shared with Government of Pakistan for further processing of cases in Pakistan after  ISLAMABAD 00022026  002 OF 002   repatriation.  The delegation intimated that the U.S. officials indicated their willingness to consider the cases for repatriation favourably if the Government of Pakistan initiated a written request.  In view of the above, the U.S. Embassy in Pakistan is requested to forward the formal request of the Government of Pakistan to the concerned U.S. authorities for repatriation of Pakistani detainees at Guantanamo Bay (GTMO) as well as those detainees who are being held in Afghanistan and to share evidence in respect of each detainee to enable the Government of Pakistan to process these cases after repatriation.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs avails itself of the opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad the assurances of its highest consideration.  Embassy of the United States of America, Islamabad.  (End text.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD18917", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2006 12:28", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 022028  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/26/2016 TAGS: KWMN, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: NATIONAL ASSEMBLY PASSES WOMEN'S PROTECTION BILL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 18917       B. ISLAMABAD 16956 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U)  This cable contains an action request: please see para. 7.   2.  (C)  Summary:  After weeks of acrimonious debate, Pakistan's National Assembly passed the controversial Women's Protection Bill on November 15, amending provisions in the Shari'a-based Hudood Ordinance on rape and sex outside marriage.  The bill passed with the support of the Pakistan Muslim League-led coalition government backed by parliamentarians from the opposition Pakistan People's Party.  Despite the exhortations of President Musharraf and Prime Minster Shaukat Aziz for all PML members to support the bill, 44 members fail to show up for the floor vote. The bill is a significant step toward improving the legal rights of women in Pakistan, a development that the U,S. should publicly welcome.  End summary.    (U)  On November 15, Pakistan's National Assembly (NA) passed the Women's Protection Bill (WPB), amending the oppressive rape and adultery provisions of the Hudood Ordinance.  The WPB received votes from 188 of the 342 NA members.  The bill will now move to the Senate, which is expected to approve the legislation.  The WPB includes two separate elements -- the text that had emerged from the all-party parliamentary Select Committee in September (Ref A), plus an amendment to the Pakistan Penal Code making \"fornication\" or \"lewdness\" a criminal offense, albeit one couched behind so many legal firewalls that it would be practically impossible to obtain a conviction.  The Pakistan Muslim League-led (PML) government is congratulating itself on its success in moving the WPB forward, with President Musharraf saying that this is only the first of a series of measures to enhance legal protections for Pakistani women. In the meantime, parliamentarians from the Muttahidda Majilis-e-Amal (MMA) coalition of religious parties, who have condemned the WPB as un-Islamic, walked out of the Assembly when the vote was called; they must now decide whether to go through with their threat to resign their assembly seats in protest.  3.   (U)  The object of the WPB was to \"bring the laws relating to zina (sex outside of marriage) and qazf (perjury), in particular, in conformity with the stated objectives of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and...in particular to provide relief and protection to women against misuse and abuse of law.\"  The most important feature of the WPB is that it breaks the link between the offenses of rape and zina, so that a woman who brings a charge of rape is no longer in jeopardy of being prosecuted for zina.  The bill also includes a series of evidentiary and procedural reforms, such as transferring jurisdiction for rape cases from religious to civil courts. (Note:  Key provisions of the WPB are described in detail in Ref A and B. End note.)  4.  (C)   The provision inserting the offense of \"fornication\" or \"lewdness\" into the Pakistani Penal Code is a compromise measure, intended to mollify PML parliamentarians reluctant to support the bill and to head off mass resignation by the 66 MMA members sitting in the Assembly.  The bill's primary drafter, Attorney General Makhdoom Ali Khan, reluctantly prepared the text for this provision, recognizing that the government might need a fall-back position.  He carefully crafted a series of firewalls in the text to ensure that rape remains severed from zina, such as language that would prevent a rape complainant from being charged with any other crime in connection with the complaint (i.e., a woman's rape complaint could not later be used as a self-incriminatory confession leading to a zina or lewdness case) and that would impose  ISLAMABAD 00022028  002 OF 002   automatic perjury penalties on witnesses who testify in zina cases that that the courts determine are unfounded.  The end result is a formidable legal bulwark that makes a conviction for the offense extraordinarily difficult.  5.  (C)  This was not an easy bill for the government to pass.  It came under heavy fire from both human rights activists, who argued for a flat repeal of the Zia-era Hudood Ordinance, as well as vociferous criticism from the religious right, which considers the WPB anathema.  MMA threats to resign, possibly forcing national elections in early 2007, thoroughly spooked PML President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and his supporters.   Many PML members -- looking toward national elections within the year -- simply did not have the stomach to take on the Hudood Ordinance, which has long been the \"third rail\" of Pakistani politics.  In the end, 44 members (almost 30 percent of PML parliamentarians) failed to show for the November 15 floor vote.  Had it not been for close cooperation with the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) parliamentary leadership and assurances of support from exiled PPP leader Benazir Bhutto, the government would not have been able to pass this bill.  6.  (C)  If nothing else, the WPB gave pundits a political drama they will not soon forget.  The November 15 floor debate was a frenzied affair, with PML President Shujaat declaring he would resign his seat if anyone could prove that the WPB contravened the Koran.  (Note:  Shujaat's declarations did little to persuade PPP leaders that he had abandoned inclination to include MMA-sponsored amendments in the WPB:  the PPP spokesperson told one diplomat that Shujaat was dealing and flirting with the religious parties up to the last minute.  End note.)   The WPB's prospects were so uncertain that only a few hours before the vote that, during a midday meeting, the National Security Advisor asked the Ambassador to call Benazir Bhutto to ensure that she had instructed the PPP delegation to vote with the government. Only minutes later, Aziz received a call from the PPP floor manager confirming that she had received Bhutto's blessing to vote for the WPB.  When the vote was called, the MMA had walked out; the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) abstained; and the PPP and remaining PML members carried the day.  7.  (C)  Action request:  As noted in post's earlier reporting  the WPB is significant legislation that will dramatically enhance the legal protections available to Pakistani women -- a step that the United States should publicly endorse as a positive step forward. Although the WPB is far from perfect, it is the first successful effort to blunt the most egregious provisions of the Hudood Ordinance; its passage, pending Senate approval, will demonstrate that reform of other laws and cultural practices that oppress women is possible.  Post urges the Department to issue a press statement recognizing this action by elected parliament representatives to improve the lives of Pakistani women.     CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD21075|06ISLAMABAD21223|06KABUL5154|06KABUL5270", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/17/2006 11:11", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 022046  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2016 TAGS: AF, IN, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER'S VIEWS ON PAK-AFG JIRGAS, BAJAUR STRIKE AND COMPOSITE DIALOGUE  REF: A. KABUL 5270      B. KABUL 5154      C. ISLAMABAD 21223      D. ISLAMABAD 21075  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  In a November 2 meeting with the Ambassador, Foreign Minister Kasuri reaffirmed Pakistan's commitment to hold a jirga as discussed at the September 27 trilateral iftar at the White House, but noted that Pakistan's vision for the event is limited to the tribal areas along the Pak-Afghan border.  Kasuri said that he will review jirga planning with Afghan Foreign Minister Spanta when the two meet in early December, after Government of Pakistan (GOP) offices have held interagency consultations. Turning to the Pakistan military strike against a madrassa/militant training camp in Bajaur Agency, FM Kasuri said he has urged the GOP to be as transparent as possible to allay public outrage.  Kasuri explained that his public remarks regarding the resolution Siachen Glacier dispute were geared to a Pakistan audience which is growing increasingly skeptical that the process can produce any significant results.  The Foreign Minister described Pakistani expectations for the counter-terrorism mechanism announced at the September meeting of President Musharraf and PM Manmohan Singh in Havana and expressed the GOP's frustration over the decision of a Lahore high Court judge to order the release of Lashkar-e-Tayyba/Jamaat ud-Dawa (LeT/JuD) leader Hafiz Saeed.   Kasuri advised the U.S. to engage Iran on its nuclear program, noting that the Iranian public remains well-disposed toward the U.S.   On domestic matters, the Minister fretted over the coming parliamentary debate on the Hudood Ordinance amendments. End summary.  Pak and Afghan Jirgas and Bilateral Engagement  2.  (C)  The Ambassador sought FM Kasuri's perspective on the Pakistan and Afghanistan jirgas which had been endorsed by Presidents Musharraf and Karzai during their September 27 meeting with President Bush.  Kasuri responded by describing his telephone conversation during Eid-al-Fitr with Afghan FM Spanta.   After Spanta had described the broad array of participants from across Afghanistan that Kabul wished to include it its jirga, Kasuri politely reminded his colleague that the jirga concept discussed at the White House had focused on the common geographic areas in which the expanding Taliban militancy challenged both governments -- i.e., the Tribal Belt along the Pak-Afghan border.  The purpose of these jirgas is to restore peace and security to these areas and to bring local peoples into harmony with their respective national governments.  The expanded national jirga currently under discussion in Kabul (Ref A and B) is simply not possible or appropriate  in Pakistan, where the jirga process is not part of the national culture beyond the traditions of the Pashtun and Baloch tribes.  FM Kasuri told the Ambassador that Spanta accepted this argument, and also agreed with Kasuri's assessment that both the GOP and GOA organizing a tribal jirga is a tricky business.  As neither Kasuri (a Punjabi) nor Spanta (a Herati) nor their Ministry advisors have expertise on this Pashtun tradition, they should be guided by their respective experts and then discuss modalities at their upcoming meeting in Kabul in early December.   Although Kasuri expected to have productive discussion with Spanta, he cautioned that he could not now guarantee that the GOP would be ready to set a date for the jirga before or at the December meeting in Kabul.  3.  (C)  Kasuri was notably more relating his conversation with Spanta than he was on the subject of the UNAMA non-paper describing the Afghan jirga, describing it as little more than a public relations exercise for the benefit of Westerner donors.  If you bring everyone in Afghanistan under one tent, he said, you will so expand the agenda as to preclude  ISLAMABAD 00022046  002 OF 003   meaningful progress on priority issues.  Better to keep the focus on the tribal members on both sides of the border who are directly affected by the immediate security threat caused by the Taliban resurgence.   FM Kasuri was receptive with the Ambassador suggested direct working-level interaction between Pakistani and Afghan jirga planners before the December Ministerial, so that both sides could explain their goals and constraints before each capital's preparations advance and solidify.  (Note:  Post has since followed up with MFA officials to urge a definite timeline for the GOP's internal interagency planning sessions, followed by direct exchanges with Afghan counterparts. End note.)  4.  (C)  Moving beyond the jirgas, FM Kasuri emphasized that the GOP wants to expand bilateral interaction with Afghanistan at all levels.  Kasuri said that he is eager to see Spanta, and would do so sooner but for the heavy schedule of international visitors arriving in Islamabad in the next month.  the Foreign Minister noted that the GOP will host the Speaker of the Parliament Qanooni (sp?) in December and that discussions are underway for visits by representatives of Afghanistan's Uzbek community.  Domestic Fall-out over Bajaur Strike  5.  (C)  The Foreign Minster noted that he had been fielding calls all week from worried political workers anxious over the negative voter reaction to the military's October 30 air strike that killed 80-some alleged militants at a Bajaur Agency madrassa.   Kasuri said that he has urged his colleagues in the government to release as much information as possible on the individuals who were killed and the evidence behind the targeting, as rumors -- that the majority of the dead were children, that the madrassa was actually hit by a U.S. Predator, etc. --  were rapidly gaining currency amongst the public.  The Ambassador noted that Pakistani military has clearly stated the rationale for the strike and accepted responsibility for the outcome, and that President Musharraf has flatly stated that the government was correct in authorizing the strike and would do so again if similar circumstances arise.  Observing that the GOP has demonstrated a willingness to enter negotiations with tribal leaders to restore peace and security to their regions, the Ambassador noted that the Bajaur strike sent a clear message to Taliban and other extremist elements in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) that the government will not turn a blind eye to their militant activities.  Indo-Pak Composite Dialogue  6.  (S)  In response to the Ambassador's questions about recent optimistic headlines on the Siachen Glacier dispute, the Foreign Minister admitted that he felt he had to project a positive attitude to generate public support before the Foreign Secretaries meeting in New Delhi on 14-15 November. The truth is, Kasuri confided, the Indians have agreed to the fundamentals of a Siachen withdrawal -- but there objections from the Indian defense establishment is blocking final signature.  Kasuri said that, when asked by the Press Trust of India (PTI) about likely deliverables should PM Manmohan Singh visit Pakistan, he hinted at a Siachen resolution; when the interview ran, PTI dropped his qualifying statements. (Note:  Kashuri appears unaware that his remarks on Siachen produced any negative reaction amongst the Indian leadership.  End note.)  Regardless of the press kerfluffle, Kasuri believes that the Foreign Secretaries should work on making the Singh visit a reality.  7.  (C)  Kasuri observed that domestic political concerns prompt Indian leaders to maintain a steady public line of \"no progress\" in the normalization talks with Pakistan, while he faces the opposite imperative to assure a skeptical Pakistani public that the Composite Dialogue progress  is producing tangible results.  Noting that he is increasingly concerned  ISLAMABAD 00022046  003 OF 003   that even liberal Pakistanis -- long the most vocal constituency for engagement with India -- are dismissing the Composite Dialogue as a waste of time.  8.  (C)   On the counter-terrorism mechanism concept that emerged from the September Musharraf-Singh meeting in Havana, FM Kasuri said that the Foreign Secretaries will discuss the modalities at the New Delhi meeting.  Counter- Terrorism, Domestic Extremism and Hudood Ordinance Amendments  9.  (C)  The Ambassador thanked the Foreign Minister for the MFA's quick action following the discovery that Pakistan Television had run advertising for al-Rashid Trust (ART), a charitable organization under UN 1267 Committee sanctions for terror finance activity.  (Note: Having been alerted to the ART ads, MFA officers immediately coordinated with the Information Ministry to ensure that all private and public broadcasters are on notice not to accept business from 1267 Committee sanctioned entities.  End note.)   The Ambassador also raised the decision of a Lahore High Court judge to release LeT/JeD leader Hafiz Mohammad Saeed from detention. Kasuri noted that President Musharraf was quite angry over the court's action and that the GOP intended to re-arrest Saeed on other security-related grounds.  The Ambassador urged that the GOP target LeT/JuD leadership broadly, as the organization is expanding its reach to Afghanistan.  The Minister also tasked his staff to confirm the status of the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, which has been languishing in Parliament for months.  10.  (C)   When the Ambassador pulsed the Minister on the prospects for the Women's Protection Bill, the government's proposed amendments to the repressive Hudood Ordinance, Kasuri lamented that moving forward with the bill poses significant risks for the government.  The MMA threat to resign if the bill is passed is serious, leaving many in the PML-led coalition uneasy.  On the other hand, the government will have betrayed President Musharraf's promise to deliver amending the most oppressive aspects of the Hudood Ordinance if it passes a watered-down bill, inviting unrelenting attack from coalition partner MQM and opposition PPP and public disapprobation by the international community.  The Ambassador noted that failure to respond resolutely to the MMA walk-out threat will expose the government as weak and feckless, leading to a year of prolonged misery in the run-up to national elections.  Kasuri sighed in agreement, before saying that President Musharraf shared the Ambassador's assessment that the government should do the right thing and let the chips fall where they may.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/17/2006 11:52", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 022057  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2016 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: BOMBINGS AND SUICIDE ATTACKS:  A PLAGUE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE BORDER  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  A November 17 suicide bomb attack on a police van in Peshawar that killed the bomber and seriously injured two police officers is another reminder that the recent spike in suicide bombings in Afghanistan is now mirrored on this side of the Pak-Afghan border.  The November 8 suicide bomb attack on Dargai Fort in Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) that killed 42 army recruits was the deadliest attack in Pakistan to date.  A week earlier, on November 1, a car bomb in Quetta killed three people and injured seven; this was also an apparent suicide attack, although local police have since said the driver may not have been aware he was carrying a bomb.  In addition, three timed bombs exploded in Peshawar in October, one of which killed six people in a food market.  A bomb hidden in a rubbish bin in Lahore exploded November 17, killing three people.  -------------------------------------- GOP Recognizes the Problem ---------------------------------------  2.  (C)  On November 16, journalists from Pakistani and American news outlets told Poloffs that, in background briefings after the October 30 missile attack on an extremist madrassa in Bajaur, GOP officials indicated that militants at the madrassa had been training as suicide bombers and were preparing for imminent attacks.  These reporters, all of whom challenged the GOP claim that its forces conducted the air strike, said they had no reason to disbelieve the government's assertion that the Bajaur madrassa was being used to train suicide bombers.  In fact, they expressed concern that such training was spreading in the tribal areas.  Contacts in both NWFP and Islamabad note that the November 8 suicide attack on Dargai Fort has led many who had initially accepted news reports that young schoolchildren had been killed in the Bajaur air strike to reconsider the GOP claims that the Bajaur facility was actually a militant training site.  Dramatically increased police protection at airports and in parts of Islamabad since Dargai, and rumors in local newspapers of other suicide bombers ready to strike, indicate that both the government and the population are aware of the increasing threat from such attacks.  ------------- Comment -------------  3.  (C)  For all the talk of the training of suicide bombers, two of Pakistan's three suicide attacks in November seem to have been bungled, with the bomber (or unwitting proxy) failing to arrive at a densely populated area prior to the explosion.  Nevertheless, the Dargai attack showed that suicide bombers do not need to be smart or lucky every time. After the heavy loss of life in the Dargai attack, facile claims that the GOP is supporting or tolerating militant groups that recruit and train suicide bombers are losing credibility.  Pakistanis -- particularly the Army, security forces and police -- are paying a heavy price in these attacks. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD20570|06ISLAMABAD21882", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/20/2006 8:23", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 022070  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/17/2016 TAGS: MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: TRIBAL AREAS: VIOLENCE CONTINUES IN THE WAZIRISTANS, CROSS-BORDER ATTACKS DOWN  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 20570      B. ISLAMABAD 21882  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (S/NF) Summary: The jury is still out on the September 5 North Waziristan Agency (NWA) Jirga Agreement.  Violations of the agreement continued during October 29 to November 12 period.  However, cross-border attacks against coalition forces in Afghanistan's Paktika province appear to have decreased dramatically since November 7.  Foreign militants displaced from NWA by the agreement are causing substantial friction in South Waziristan.  End summary.  -------------------------------------- Security Incidents in North Waziristan --------------------------------------  2. (SBU) Embassy contacts and Pakistani newspapers noted the declining security situation in NWA during the period of this report.  Violations of the September 5 NWA Jirga Agreement included:  -- November 3: The beheaded body of cleric Maulana Salahuddin was found between Razmak and Makeen.  A leaflet attached to his body said he was a U.S. spy.  (Violation:  No targeted killings.)  -- November 5:  Unknown persons kidnapped an elderly man named Faizullah.  His friends believe local militants kidnapped him because of his anti-militant sympathies.  They believe he is dead.  (No targeted killings.)  -- November 10: Suspected militants fired five rockets at a Frontier Corps camp in Mirali.  A local militant spokesman denied local Taliban involvement.  (No attacks on GOP facilities.)  -- November 10: Prominent pro-government tribal elder Khan Azhar escaped an assassination attempt near Miranshah.  (No targeted killings.)  -- Other killings and kidnappings occurred in the area, but the motives were unclear.  ------------------------------------- Violent Two Weeks in South Waziristan -------------------------------------  3. (SBU) Embassy contacts report that Uzbek militants who fled to South Waziristan after the September 5 NWA agreement are forcefully resisting local pressure to leave South Waziristan.  Locals want the Uzbeks to leave in part because the Uzbeks are engaged in criminal activities including kidnapping for ransom and robberies, but also because GOP officials are pressuring Taliban leaders to evict foreign fighters. Previous FATA security updates noted the attack on anti-foreigner militant Khanan Wazir on September 24 and the murder of two of his supporters on September 27 (ref A).  -- November 5: Uzbek militants shot dead Malik Wali Zar, a Khanan associate, at Inzar village.  -- November 10: A bomb, presumably placed by Uzbeks, killed four Khanan associates in the Danday area.  4.  (SBU)  In an event not necessarily related to the Uzbek-led violence, on November 7, two rockets were fired over a Scouts Camp in Wana while NWFP Governor Jan Orakzai was meeting with tribal elders (ref B).  Five more rockets landed near the camp that evening.  The press reports that the GOP has questioned various tribe members suspected of being connected to the missile attacks, which observers doubt were actually meant to injure the Governor.  --------------------------------------------- ---  ISLAMABAD 00022070  002 OF 002   Signs of Talibanization in Settled Areas of NWFP --------------------------------------------- ---  5. (SBU) Media reports that the Taliban were distributing pamphlets in Darra Adamkhel, approximately 40 kilometers south of Peshawar, warning tribal elders to \"behave themselves\" and threatening to close down girls schools.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Attacks on Coalition Forces Near the Pakistan Border --------------------------------------------- -------  6. (S/NF) Cross-border attacks have decreased dramatically along the border between Afghanistan's Paktika province and Pakistan's North and South Waziristan since November 7. Office of Defense Representative-Pakistan (ODRP) attributes the decrease to the commencement of Operation Catamount Blitz (septel).  7. (S/NF) ODRP reports the following security incidents within five kilometers (km) of the Pak-Afghan border (nearest Pakistani agency in parentheses):  -- November 2: Seventeen rockets fired at border control post (BCP) 213, observed 6 km southeast of Forward Operating Base (FOB) Shkin.  Point of origin 200 meters from border. (South Waziristan)  -- November 2: Task Force (TF) Vanguard patrol received rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) and small arms fire (SAF) 15 km southeast of FOB Chamkani.  Point of origin within 2 km of border. (Kurram)  -- November 2: TF Catamount reported  SAF and machine gun fire.  Enemy positions and point of origin were within Pakistan.  Observation post 4 (OP4) observed 15 enemy personnel.  (North Waziristan) (Note: A serious violation of the NWA Jirga Agreement.)  -- November 3: TF Catamount reported 9 rockets in vicinity of Forward Operating Base (FOB) Bermal.  (South Waziristan)  -- November 4: Rockets fired at FOB Sarkoni. (Bajaur)  -- November 8: TF Catamount reported two ACMs, one with RPG, maneuvering 13 km northeast of FOB Bermel.  (North Waziristan)  -- November 8: TF Titan reported two rockets impacted inside FOB Naray. (Chitral/Dir)  -- November 10: Patrol engaged ACM east of FOB Mangretey. ACM egressed east into Pakistan, in violation of the NWA agreement.  (North Waziristan)  ------- Comment -------  8.  (C)  President Musharraf himself admits that the NWA agreement has not been as successful as he had hoped, but he believes more time is needed before judging the agreement a failure.  Meanwhile, a local journalist told Poloffs November 16 that residents in much of FATA are \"terrified\" of local militants and are reluctant to report on training camps and other suspicious activities, particularly in the wake of the October 30 attack on the extremist \"madrassa\" training camp in Bajaur.  Such fear further complicates getting an accurate picture of realities on the ground in the tribal areas.  End comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD22000", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/27/2006 9:55", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 022174  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2016 TAGS: AF, EFIN, PK, PREL, PTER, KTFN, UN SUBJECT: TERROR FINANCE: EMBASSY PRESSES GOP ON UN 1267 COMMITTEE CASES  REF: ISLAMABAD 22000  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  As noted in Ref A, post has raised the ongoing operations of two UN 1267 Committee-designated entities -- Al Rashid Trust, Al Akhtar Trust and Lashkar-e-Tayyba/Jamaat ud-Dawa (LeT/JuD) -- with contacts throughout the Government of Pakistan (GOP).  While the Ambassador has pressed the issue with the Foreign Secretary and National Security Advisor, emboffs have engaged the MFA's UN Directorate and the Information Ministry.  The GOP has responded by reviewing its procedures to disseminate information on the prohibitions that accompany UN 1267 designation to ensure that broadcasters and print media are aware that they should decline requests to purchase advertising space.  No GOP official, however, has committed to taking direct action to close the operations of these entities.  In addition to raising the issue with GOP officials, post has also shared open source reports of these entities fund-raising activities with like-minded missions in the Islamabad diplomatic community, as well as with the visiting UNSC Counterterrorism Executive Directorate delegation.  End summary.  2.  (C)  In a November 17 meeting, the Ambassador presented Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan with open source material detailing Al Rashid's television solicitations for Zakat donations, a website highlighting federal Minister of Information Durrani's participation in an Al Akhtar Trust Ramadan event, and a press report on the declaration of the Ministry of Defense Parliamentary Secretary that he was proud to be a member of LeT and that he seeks to extend support to jihadi organizations when they seek his \"cooperation.\"  Each of these reports is disturbing in itself, the Ambassador said, as they seriously damage Pakistan's image in the international community.  These incidents point to a more fundamental question:  is the GOP is committed to implementing the sanctions that follow a UN 1267 Committee designation?  3.  (S)  While the Foreign Secretary recognized the detrimental consequences of the news reports of these incidents, he cited Al Rashid's pending challenge to the GOP's implementation of 1267 sanctions (freezing accounts, closing offices, etc.) as an impediment to more active government intervention.  The Ambassador emphasized that this series of incidents could lead reasonable observers to conclude that the GOP is not serious about its UN 1267 obligations; he urged the GOP to take immediate and definitive steps against the designated entities.  The Ambassador concluded by stating that without strong public action by the GOP, the U.S. will be forced  to formally bring these incidents to the attention of the UN 1267 Committee. (Note: In an aside, the Foreign Secretary asked the Ambassador whether the U.S, has evidence linking JuD to terrorist activity.  The Ambassador replied affirmatively, noting that the USG has shared such information with GOP intelligence agencies.  The Ambassador also advised the Foreign Secretary that there is a growing concern in the USG about LeT/JuD support to the insurgency in Afghanistan.  End note.)  4.  (C)  A week later, in a November 24 meeting with National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz, the Ambassador presented the same points, supported by copies of the open source reports. (Note:  This package of open source material included a  ISLAMABAD 00022174  002 OF 003   November 20 report of a full page Al Akhtar advertisement in a Karachi Urdu-language paper solicit donations of meat for the poor during the coming Eid-al-Adha holiday.  End note.) The Ambassador reported that he had also raised the issue with the Foreign Secretary, but was not certain that the gravity of these UN 1267 Committee violations had registered with the MFA.  The Ambassador observed that the bilateral relationship would not be helped if the U.S. is forced to formally notify the UN 1267 Committee of Pakistan's lax implementation of its international obligations.  NSA Aziz agreed that the GOP wished to avoid a formal referral to the UN 1267 committee, expressing serious concern over the broadcast and publication of the Al Akhtar and Al Rashid zakat solicitations and particular irritation over the remarks by the Parliamentary Secretary for Defense.  While saying that the GOP cannot close down the accounts and operations of JuD, as the entity is not yet the subject of a 1267 designation, Aziz agreed that there is no similar impediment to taking firm action against designees Al Akhtar and Al Rashid Trusts.  Aziz promised the Ambassador that he would pursue the matter within the GOP interagency.  5.  (C)  Complementing the Ambassador's outreach, Public Affairs Counselor and econoff have raised the issue of 1267 designees' published and broadcast fund-raising solicitations with the Information Secretary and with the MFA Spokesperson and Director General (UN).  The Information Secretary pleaded ignorance that UN 1267 sanctions applied to broadcast and print media; once the matter was brought to his attention by the Embassy, he said that he ordered the Information Ministry to advise all state-affiliated media outlets that they must not/not to accept advertising or public service solicitations from any of the 1267 designees.  (Note:  According to the MFA, a similar effort to reach private media outlets is said to be underway by the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority. End note.)  Tasneem Aslam, the MFA spokesperson and UN Director General, reaffirmed the GOP's commitment to honoring its UN obligations, but noted that a way must be found to \"rehabilitate\" designated entities, as their charitable and humanitarian activities are a vital part of Pakistani society.  6.  (C)  The Ambassador discussed the recent spate of public reports on 1267 designee solicitations with Ambassador Ruperez, who led the UNSC Counterterrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) delegation on a November 17-24 mission to assess Pakistan's commitment to combat terrorism. PolCouns also privately briefed the senior legal advisor on USG concerns over the continued operation of these entities in Pakistan.  PolCouns has also shared the open source reports of the 1267-designated entities with like-minded colleagues in the diplomatic community whose Embassies' also engage the GOP on terror finance issues.  7.  (SBU)  Post's efforts have not gone unnoticed:  the November 25 edition of the English-language \"The Pakistan Post\" carried a front-page article with the headline \"Banned Outfits' Ads Annoy US.\"  The article said that the Interior Ministry has instructed relevant government departments \"to create awareness\" within the press that media should not accept advertising by organization designated by the UN.  The Pakistan Post says that the Interior Ministry's report notes that \"our each and every paper is monitored by the U.S. State Department that (sic) has a separate section to monitor Urdu newspapers.\"  The Post article also reviews alleged U.S. efforts to include JuD in the LeT 1267 designation, a campaign the paper describes as stymied after China demanded  ISLAMABAD 00022174  003 OF 003   evidence that JuD is connected to terror finance activities. (Note:  The Post's story coincided with banner headlines describing dozens of new bilateral Pak-Chinese initiatives announced during Chinese President Hu's November 23-26 state visit to Pakistan.  End note.)  8.  (C)  Comment:  Emboffs will continue to engage GOP officials and contacts in the press, financial community, political parties and the diplomatic community to raise awareness and generate multiple points of pressure to demand that the GOP take firm action to terminate the operations of 1267-designated entities.  Post recommends reassessing GOP progress on this issue in late December, with an eye to formal notification to the UN 1267 Committee in early 2007 if the GOP response is unsatisfactory. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06NEWDELHI7954", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/27/2006 10:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 022178  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2016 TAGS: AF, IN, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: FOREIGN SECRETARY BRIEFS AMBASSADOR ON NOVEMBER 13-14 COMPOSITE DIALOGUE  REF: NEW DELHI 7954  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  During a November 17 meeting with the Ambassador, Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan was positive about the tone of the November 13-14 Composite Dialogue talks, saying that the atmosphere was business-like with no \"excessive restating of positions.\"  The effort focused on exploring areas for progress.  Khan said that the outcome was largely what he had anticipated, with some positive movement.  Despite this modest progress, ForSec Khan said that it is increasingly difficult for GOP officials to persuade the Pakistani public that the Composite Dialogue process is solving any significant dispute between the two capitals.  We need to solve some issue, Khan said, or we will not be able to convince the public that the process is worthwhile.  Khan reported that he had a pleasant 40-minute meeting with Indian Foreign Minister Mukerjee, but that the conversation was little more than a set piece, with each side stating long-held positions.  End summary.  2.  (C)  Counterterrorism (CT) Mechanism:  Khan said that the GOP understood the domestic pressures facing their Indian counterparts on terrorism, and agreed that establishing a CT Mechanism is necessary to insulate the peace process.  He said that he told ForSec Menon directly that Pakistan cannot prevent terror attacks in Pakistan and certainly cannot guarantee against terror attacks on Indian territory.  Khan said that the Indian side passed some information regarding the 2005 bombing in New Delhi and 2006 Varanassi bombings, but that these consisted of the statements of detainees suspects who are not Pakistani national who have indirect links to Lashkar-e-Tayyba (LeT).  The MFA has passed this information to the appropriate security services for investigation.  Khan stressed to the Ambassador that the CT Mechanism must be forward-looking to prevent future terror events, similar to the partnership that Pakistan has developed with the UK. If the parties use the CT mechanism to blame each other, it will do nothing to improve security or bilateral relations.  Both governments are facing serious CT challenges and must be serious about this cooperative endeavor.  (Note:  When the Ambassador asked whether the Indian delegation had a detailed sense of CT actions undertaken by the GOP in the past year, Khan said that he was not sure.  I did not feel comfortable raising the issue, he said, as it would have led to a discussion of India's internal challenges from domestic extremism -- too sensitive a topic to address after the pause in the dialogue.  End note.)  3.  (C)  Kashmir:  ForSec Khan indicated that there had been some exchange on Kashmir, but that each side had been careful not to step on issues under review in back-channel discussions.  Aside from exchanging stock positions (Pakistan pressing for demilitarization in Jammu & Kashmir, with India responding that violence in the region must first be reduced), the most significant point of agreement was a common recognition that each side must work to streamline bureaucratic hurdles that impair existing confidence-building measures (CBMs), such as the cross-LOC bus route.  4.  (C)  Sir Creek:  ForSec Khan detected some Indian willingness to move forward on Sir Creek, a reflection of the looming deadline to submit maritime claims under the UN Law of the Sea Convention.  If India is ready, Khan said, so is Pakistan, noting that a November 23-25 bilateral meeting of technical experts could reach a resolution.  5.  (C)  Siachen Glacier:  Khan expressed some disappointment in the discussions on Siachen, wondering whether the Indian military's reluctance to withdraw from the Glacier is because  ISLAMABAD 00022178  002 OF 002   it is comfortable in with its current situation or instead reflects genuine fears.  If the latter, we can address it through a dialogue between the Army Chiefs of General Staff. Khan reviewed the two sides' positions -- that India wants to authenticate current positions, so it would have a demarcated map should Pakistan attempt to re-occupy posts following a withdrawal; that Pakistan has proposed a zone of disengagement which incorporates a statement of current positions and a schedule for withdrawal into the agreement. Khan says that the Indian Foreign Office is amenable, but that there is palpable opposition in the Indian defense establishment.  Khan emphasized that Pakistan cannot accept demarcation of current positions as the first step of an agreement, as this would confer tacit acceptance of Indian-egress on disputed territory; current positions must be incorporated as part of a complete package and schedule for withdrawal.  Khan said that ForSec Menon agreed to revisit this issue.  Khan told the Ambassador that, dueling press headlines to the contrary, Siachen cannot be resolved in a day, as a series of CGS-level military meetings are needed to resolve technical issues related to demarcation and withdrawal. (Note:  Khan has wanted to explore allowing international trekking and research expeditions to travel to the zone of engagement, a CBM that had caught his fancy, but had been discouraged from raising the concept as it is allegedly anathema to the Indian defense establishment. End note.)  6.  (C)  SAFTA and Trade:  Khan said that detailed discussions on SAFTA could be discussed by Commerce Ministers at SAARC.  Khan did share with the Indian delegation GOP concerns about non-tarrif barriers, which keep Pakistani products -- particularly textiles -- out of Indian markets.  7.  (C)  Comment:  During his November 26-28 personal visit to New Delhi, Foreign Minister Kasuri hopes to build on improved atmosphere that the Foreign Secretary reported at the Composite Dialogue talks.  Although the stated purpose of Kasuri's travel is to attend the wedding of the daughter of Union Minister Mani Shankar Ayer on November 27, Kasuri is reported to be joining Foreign Minister Mukerjee for lunch earlier that day for an informal review of bilateral relations and progress in the Composite Dialogue.  This will be Kasuri's first meeting with Mukerjee since the latter assumed the External Affairs portfolio.  The local press is already speculating that FM Mukerjee will visit Pakistan in mid-January, followed by the long-awaited visit by PM Manmohan Singh in late February or early March. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/29/2006 0:40", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 022215  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/28/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK, KNNP, MCAP, IN SUBJECT: GOP NOTIFICATION OF BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S/NF)  On November 28, MFA (Disarmament Cell) Director Imran Haider advised PolCouns that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) will conduct a test of a ballistic surface-to-surface missile.  The launch window is between November 29 and December 3, 2006.  The missile's overflight will be within Pakistan's territorial borders.  Per existing agreements with India, the GOP has already notified the appropriate officials in New Delhi of the coming test.  As a courtesy, the GOP has also notified the Governments of China, Afghanistan and Iran of the coming test. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE169199", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/30/2006 5:07", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 022237  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  PM/PPA - RFEATHERSTONE SCA/RA - FMILLER  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KPKO, MARR, MASS, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN KEEN ON GPOI, SEEKS MORE INFO  REF: STATE 169199  1. (U) This cable contains an action request -- please see para 6.  2. (SBU) On November 28, PolOff met MFA Director (UN I) Haider Shah to follow up on reftel USG proposal for Pakistan to participate in the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI).  Shah said that Pakistan is amenable to taking part in GPOI, but on two conditions: a) No pressure to send Pakistani peacekeepers on operations outside the UN umbrella; and b) U.S. support for Pakistan's own peacekeeping training proposal.  Pakistan is ready in principle to move ahead on GPOI but wants a clearer roadmap of next steps in the process.  3. (SBU) Shah appreciated our talking point that each nation makes a sovereign decision whether to deploy peace operations troops.  Pakistan is reluctant to participate in any initiative that might compel Pakistani troops to support non-UN operations.  Shah reiterated Pakistani principles regarding peacekeeping operations: a) UN mandate, preferably a UN Security Council resolution; b) recipient country supports the operation; and c) \"peacekeeping\" rather than \"peace enforcement\".  4. (SBU) Shah mentioned his government's existing proposal to establish an international peacekeeping training institute in Pakistan.  Shah said this concept does not conflict with GPOI.  Moreover, Pakistan wants U.S. support for this proposal in conjunction with GPOI.  5. (U) Shah asked for clarification regarding how to formalize Pakistan's participation in GPOI (i.e., bilateral agreement, joint statement).  He said a more formal response to the USG's invitation is forthcoming.  6. (U) Post requests Department's guidance soonest on the next steps for Pakistan's involvement in GPOI.  Post also requests Department transmit the powerpoint presentation on GPOI as described reftel.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06KABUL5625", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/30/2006 12:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 022251  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/30/2016 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, NATO SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER DENIES PREDICTING NATO FAILURE IN AFGHANISTAN  REF: A. KABUL 05625       B. CROCKER-NORLAND EMAIL 29 NOV 2006      C. GRENCIK-NORLAND EMAIL 29 NOV 2006  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  Following a November 29 press account (reftel) that described Pakistani Foreign Minister Khushid Kasuri as privately telling visiting foreign ministers of NATO member states that the Taliban is winning in Afghanistan and advising NATO members from sending in more troops, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) issued a November 30 press statement categorically denying that the Minister had ever conveyed such a message.  The MFA statement, reproduced in full below, said that the Minister has consistently presented Pakistan's long-held position that a comprehensive strategy -- military, economic and political -- is necessary to resolve Afghanistan's problems.  According to MFA (Americas) Director General Sohail Mahmood, in addition to the MFA statement, Pakistan's High Commissioner in London has written to the editors of the \"Daily Telegraph\" challenging the accuracy of press report.  The MFA Spokesperson also responded strongly to a statement by the Afghan Foreign Ministry that Pakistan has told NATO officials that the Taliban should be included in a new government, denying that statement and rejecting the Afghan Ministry's claim that Pakistan is interferring in Afghanistan's internal affairs.  2.  (SBU)  In a November 29 conversation with the Ambassador, FM Kasuri was equally forceful, saying that he has never described ISAF as a failed mission, discouraged NATO members from giving their full support to ISAF or implied that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) was seeking a new government coalition in Kabul that would exclude President Karzai.  To the contrary, Kasuri said, the GOP supports President Karzai and the elected government of Afghanistan as the only legitimate government of Afghanistan; building a stable and secure Afghanistan, he concluded, can only serve the national interest of Pakistan.  3. (SBU)  During a November 30 meeting, Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan also told the Ambassador that the \"Daily Telegraph\" report was dead wrong with regard to the remarks attributed to the Foreign Minister.  As to comments the \"Daily Telegraph\" attributed to the Governor of North West Frontier Province suggesting that Britain's long history of military encounters in Afghanistan should have led it to think twice before assuming command of the ISAF mission, ForSec Khan suggested that Governor Orakzai was responding in kind to public complaints by Afghan and NATO member state officials that Pakistan is not doing enough to stop the Taliban insurgency.   (Note:  Orakzai's comments, reflecting a negative assessment of developments in Aghanistan, were widely reported in the local press November 25-26.  End note.)  Khan concluded by quoting President Musharraf's observation to UK PM Blair that Afghanistan's problems will be solved in Afghanistan, not in Pakistan.  4.  (C)  The Ambassador took the opportunity presented by the ForSec's clarification to underscore the importance of GWOT partners not succumbing to the blame game.  Noting that he had called upon Governor Orakzai in Peshawar the day before, the Ambassador said that he had told the Governor that the USG has its own concerns and frustrations over the implementation of the North Waziristan agreement, but that we convey our views directly and quietly, without going to the press.  We would appreciate the same consideration from our Pakistani partners, the Ambassador concluded, noting in closing that the only party to benefit from this public sniping is our common enemy.  The ForSec agreed that the U.S. has been circumspect in sharing its concerns to the GOP, but that the same could not be said of officials of other NATO/ISAF member states.  ISLAMABAD 00022251  002 OF 002    5.  (C)  Comment:  Post has contacted other NATO member missions who have hosted high-level visits to Islamabad in the past month (e.g., UK, the Netherlands, Hungary); all confirmed that FM Kasuri had not/not said anything approaching the remarks attributed to him in the \"Daily Telegraph\" article.  Despite this universal confirmation by diplomats who have recently met the Foreign Minister that remarks such as these are simply not in Kasuri's repetoire, post has been dismayed to find colleagues from NATO member missions who accepted the accuracy of the reporting without question.  To some extent, this is due to the popularity and prestige of the reporter -- Ahmed Rashid, a well-respected chonrincleer of the Afghan wars and a vocal critic of President Musharraf -- within Islamabad's diplomatic community.  This is not the first time that Post has noted inaccuracies in Rashid's reporting; it is deeply unfortunate the this latest report has frayed the incipient bonds of trust between Islamabad and Kabul.  6.  (U)  November 30 MFA press statement:  (Begin text)  The Daily Times of 30 November 2005 has quoted some remarks attributed to the Foreign Minister by the Daily Telegraph.  The Foreign MInister's comments have been distorted and misrepresented.  The Foreign Minister did not say that the Taliban were winning the war in Afghanistan and NATO was bound to fail nor has he advised any country against sending more troops.  The Foreign Minister had only reiterated what Pakistan has been stressing all along - the need for a comprehensive strategy.  The Foreign Minister had emphasized that military approach alone would not resolve the problem in Afghanistan.  It must be combined with political and ecomic approach.  The international community must encourage national reconciliation and undertake an extensive reconstruction programme for South and Southeast Afghanistan in addition to what it is being done for the rest of Afghanistan and address the problem of narcotics.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/4/2006 10:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 022290  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2016 TAGS: KWMN, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PROTECTION OF PAKISTANI WOMEN:  NOW, IT'S THE LAW  REF: ISLAMABAD 22028 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  Summary:  On December 1st, President Pervez Musharraf signed the Women's Protection Bill (WPB) into law, marking the first time in three decades that a Pakistani government has successfully rolled back laws that have stood virtually untouched since the institution of the Hudood Ordinances under Zia.  Adoption of the WPB has thrown the Muttahida Majlis-e Amal (MMA) coalition of religious parties into disarray, with Jamiat-I Ulema-I Islamia - Fazlur (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman waving off the call by Jamaat-I Islami leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed for all MMA members to resign from their National and Provincial Assembly seats.  With the fractures in the MMA exposed, the Pakistan Muslim League-led (PML) government is preparing to introduce follow-on legislation to address cultural practices that oppress Pakistani women.  End summary.  2.  (C)  The Ambassador and USAID/Democracy Officer met with Minister of Women's Development Sumaira Malik soon after the National Assembly passed the WPB.  The Ambassador told the Minister that the official U.S. response has been positive yet low-key, to avoid fueling right-wing rumors that the U.S. had instigated the legislation.  Accepting the Ambassador's congratulations, Malik stated that this is the first time that Pakistan's mullahs have been successfully challenged. She said that MMA political posturing, which included a threat that all its members would resign from Parliament, not only highlighted well-known rifts between JI and JUI-F, but also deepened regional cleavages within those parties.  These miscalculations constituted a serious political blunder; the MMA now wished it had chosen another issue over which to draw lines in the sand.  By calling the MMA's bluff, the government had left the religious parties sheepish over their defeat.  Malik said that the MMA leadership is now trying to escape from the corner into which it has painted itself into by saying that resignations may not be necessary,and instead calling for massive anti-WPB rallies in early December.  3.  (C)  Malik characterized the WPM as a \"triumph of moderates\". The successful passage of the WPB required the PML-led coalition and Pakistan People's Party (PPP) to collaborate against Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) and MMA.  Minister Malik admitted that elements in the PML were not completely behind the bill; she said that a changing of the old guard within the party might be needed if they do not have the courage to take on other important issues in the future.  She credited PPP stalwart Sherrie Rehman with holding the PPP together in support the WPB.  The Minster now plans to personally carry out a nationwide outreach to women to explain the new legislation and its consistency with the tenets of Islam.  Her early planned stops include D.I. Khan District in the North West Frontier Province, a visit to the tribal areas, and a trip to rural Sindh Province.  4.  (C)  The Ambassador noted that the U.S., through USAID would like to be supportive of initiatives that promote and protect women's human rights in Pakistan.  Recognizing that well-intentioned U.S. programming could have negative blowback to the GOP if not designed and implement with an appreciation of political and social nuances in Pakistan, he stated that USAID would work closely with the Women's Development Ministry in the coming months to design meaningful and constructive support.  Malik thanked the Ambassador, saying that her Ministry would appreciate programming that helps move the country away from the status quo in a gradual, measured manner.  Going too fast, she said, plays into the religious extremists' hands.  She sees her mission as one of drawing a distinction between \"modernizing\" Pakistani women and \"westernizing\" them.  Actions perceived as trying to achieve the latter would bring disastrous results.   ISLAMABAD 00022290  002 OF 002   5.  (C)  As to the next steps, PML President Chaudhary Shujaat Hussain has introduced a private bill in the National Assembly that would criminalize certain cultural practices that discriminate against Pakistani women:  obstructing a women's right of inheritance, forced marriage, marriage to the Koran (to prevent property from passing outside the family should the woman marry), divorce through triple talat, etc.  Shujaat and PML Secretary-General Mushahid Hussain Sayed told poloffs on December 1 that this bill will serve two purposes.  First, it directly addresses Pakistani traditions that have long been the means of oppressing women.  The bill will also provide a face-saving platform for JUI-F and more moderate MMA elements to justify their refusal to follow JI's call for mass resignations over the WPB, as Shujaat has promised to engage actively with MMA and religious leaders on this follow-on legislation.  To allow JUI-F some breathing space, the PML leader had agreed with Fazlur Rehman's request not to call the National Assembly into session in December. (Note:  Post has a copy of Shujaat's bill, which is an extraordinarily lean for draft legislation.  This bare bones framework has the potential to be transformed into an legislative Xmas tree, if Shujaat's commitment to seek MMA guidance on the bill holds.  Post will carefully track the bill's mutations as the PML-MMA consultations move forward through the December legislative break.  End comment.)  6.  (C) COMMENT:  As noted in a November 24 \"Friday Times\" editorial, successive Pakistani governments over the past thirty years have shifted the state from a fundamentally secular orientation to a deeply entrenched Islamicized one. Initiated under Z.A. Bhutto, the shift accelerated dramatically under General Zia-ul-Haq, continued through Benazir Bhutto's administrations, and picked up steam in Nawaz Sharif's two terms as Prime Minister.  In the context of this history, President Musharraf and his team deserve credit for successfully striking down the most onerous provisions of the Hudood Ordinance through the WPB.  Although it is encouraging that some GOP leaders have the courage to take on the religious extremists by softening the most egregious anti-women laws, this commitment is far from universal within the current government.  The governing PML is split between forward-looking leaders \"enlightened moderation,\" and scrappy party tacticians primarily concerned with gaining political ground in the run-up to national elections in 2007.  Reformers like Malik should be proud of their achievement with the WPB, while preparing themselves for many battles ahead in the struggle to enhance and protect the rights of Pakistani women. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/5/2006 3:52", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 022303  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2016 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SENIOR PAKISTAN SENATOR WANTS TO REACH OUT TO AFGHAN COUNTERPARTS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) During a December 1 meeting with poloffs, Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General and Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Mushahid Hussain Sayed discussed his desire to begin a regular parliamentary exchange with his counterparts in Afghanistan.  He said that he discussed his idea with Afghan Ambassador Tarzi on November 30. (\"Sometimes you need to go around the military and the Foreign Office to get things done,\" he said.)  Sayed said that he was prepared to lead a parliamentary delegation to Afghanistan or to host an Afghan delegation in Pakistan to get things started.  Sayed specifically mentioned a desire to meet with Speaker Yunus Qanooni. (Note: Post understands that Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been trying to schedule a visit for months.  End Note.)  2. (U) Sayed is also organizing a Senate hearing on Afghanistan.  The hearing is scheduled for December 14 and will feature testimony from experts including Rustam Shah Mohammed (Pakistan's former ambassador to Afghanistan) and journalist Ahmed Rashid.  3. (U) Sayed's suggestion for Afghanistan-Pakistan parliamentary exchanges coincided with the visit of a six-member parliamentary delegation from Azerbaijan.  Sayed discussed his idea publicly during a joint Azeri-Pakistani press conference on December 1, where he remarked that the resolution of the Afghan issue would only be possible by involving the Taliban in the dialogue process.  (Note:  This is the first time post has heard Mushahid mention the Taliban angle, despite the fact that he often speaks with poloffs about Afghanistan.  End Note.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD22237", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/6/2006 9:11", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 022317  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  PM/PPA - RFEATHERSTONE SCA/RA - FMILLER  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KPKO, MARR, MASS, PK SUBJECT: GLOBAL PEACE OPERATIONS INITIATIVE: PAKISTAN'S OFFICIAL RESPONSE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 22237       B. STATE 169199  1. This cable contains an action request -- please see para 3.  2. On December 4, MFA Director (UN I) Haider Shah delivered to Poloff the Government of Pakistan's written response to the U.S. proposal for Pakistan to participate in the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI) (ref B). Pakistan wants to proceed with GPOI and awaits further implementation details from the U.S.  This non-paper response tracks with Shah's earlier comments regarding the GOP's stance on GPOI (ref A).  3. Action Request: Post requests Department's guidance soonest on the next steps for Pakistan's involvement in GPOI.  4. Text of Pakistan's non-paper follows.  BEGIN TEXT  -- Pakistan supports in principle the US Global Peace Operations initiative (GPOI) 2007-07.  However, Pakistan would like to reiterate that the deployment of Pakistan's troops/contingents for peace support missions is the sovereign decision of Pakistan under UN mandate and with the consent of the host country.  -- Such deployments are only for peace keeping operations and not for peace enforcement missions.  -- Decisions regarding deployment of Pakistani troops/contingents are taken on a case by case basis based on the above principles.  -- Pakistan would also like to have US support for the establishment of a regional peace keeping centre and related facilities in Pakistan either in the context of US Global Peace Operations initiative or other bilaterally agreed arrangements with the United States.  -- Pakistan looks forward to working out the details regarding participation in GPOI.  END TEXT.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/6/2006 12:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 022323  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2016 TAGS: PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S ELITE REACT DIFFERENTLY TO PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF'S PROPOSED KASHMIR SOLUTION  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U) On December 4, Indian television network NDTV interviewed President Musharraf in Islamabad for an Indian audience.  Although his remarks were reported widely in the international press the day after the interview, Pakistan's news media was slower in picking up the story.  During the interview, Musharraf said that Pakistan would be willing to give up its claim on Kashmir if India agreed to allow for far-reaching self-governance for the region.  NDTV reported his proposed solution as including four points: (1) no changes in the boundaries of Kashmir; (2) make borders and the line of control irrelevant; (3) staggered demilitarization; and (4) autonomy or self-governance with a joint supervision mechanism.  2. (C) Reaction to Musharraf's interview among the intellectual and political elite in Islamabad covered a broad spectrum, from hopeful to skeptical to resentful.  An academic told PolAsst that Musharraf's suggestions are not much different than in the past, but his overture should be viewed as a wish to strengthen Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh among the hawkish circles of the Indian establishment to make progress.  More than one politician viewed Musharraf's statement as a trial balloon to see what the Indian side would do next: \"I personally do not give much importance to what Musharraf has said... I would not like to think that Musharraf will simply give up on the geographical territory of Kashmir,\" said one Embassy contact.  Sardar Amjad Yousaf, Vice President of Musharraf's own ruling Pakistan Muslim League took a darker view.  Yousaf said that Musharraf's previous diplomatic overtures regarding Kashmir were a failed attempt to get the West's support for Pakistan's position, and that Musharraf continues to try to make progress now regardless of where the \"progress\" will lead Pakistan.  \"I think his statements on the Kashmir issue portray him as a frustrated dictator,\" Yousaf said.  3. (C) The Kashmiris themselves seemed to resent the bargaining going on over their heads.  Haji Rafiq Dar, spokesman of the Jammu-Kashmir Liberation Front, was clear about his group's interests: \"Now what is most important is that neither side should ignore the aspirations of the Kashmiri people... We take Musharraf's words as the beginning of a political process and that is about it.\"   Sardar Khalid Ibrahim, President of Jammu Kashmir People's Party and AJK Legislative Assembly member, put it more bluntly: \"The idea of joint supervision is absolutely absurd... we cannot and will not allow this.\"  4. (C) Note: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) has not issued an official statement contextualizing Musharraf's remarks.  On December 6, MFA spokeswoman Tasnim Aslam told the DCM that Musharraf broke no new ground with his remarks. If any headline should be made from Musharraf's interview, Aslam said, it should be Musharraf's call for flexibility from both sides to come to a solution.  End Note.  5. (C) Comment: Musharraf's statements are broadly consistent with what he has said in the past.  Nevertheless, his reaching out now reflects his continued commitment and his personal desire to reach some kind of solution on Kashmir. Thus far, his style of floating his ideas and thoughts in the media has not endeared him to domestic audience, his Indian interlocutors, or to Kashmiris.  End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD650", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/12/2007 2:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000674  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2017 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: G.G. ON JIRGAS  REF: ISLAMABAD 650  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Minister of Culture Dr. Ghazi Gulab (G.G.) Jamal, a key member of Pakistan's jirga commission, told us February 7 that, when representatives of the two commissions meet later in February, key topics for discussion will include: to whom to issue jirga invitations; the scope of the jirga,s authority; and the jirga,s enforcement powers. Jamal stated -- as have other Embassy contacts -- that if Punjabis or Sindhis participate in the meeting, Pashtuns will strongly oppose calling the event a \"jirga.\"  He also warned that no matter how well planned, at least some  participants will inevitably bring up the Durand Line or Pashtun independence.  He postulated that such \"Pandora,s Box\" issues created greater angst in Pakistan than in Afghanistan. End summary.  2. (C) In a February 7 conversation with poloffs, Minister of Culture (and Jirga Commission member) Dr. G.G. Jamal reviewed the challenges facing those charged with moving ahead on the September 27 White House Iftar proposal for a Pak-Afghan jirga. While the minister displayed a sophisticated understanding of both sides, need to be seen taking steps toward peace and stability -- and acknowledged the potential benefits of a parallel or cross-border meeting in building confidence and hope -- Jamal, like other Embassy contacts, stressed that the decision to hold a \"jirga\" had been made without understanding Pakistani Pashtun jirga traditions. Pakistani Pashtun jirgas he explained, convene to decide specific questions, such as a person,s guilt or innocence, how much compensation a family or tribe owed a counterpart, or how to resolve a tribal conflict.  It was unclear to Jamal how the parallel jirgas, or even a cross-border jirga, would define a specific question to be resolved.  The other critical component of Pashtun jirgas, he said, was the unquestioned authority of the jirga to issue a \"waqt\", an enforceable verdict that all participants were obligated to respect.  3.  (C)  Jamal said the Pakistani Commission was not contrarian, but rather wanted to \"listen to the Afghan concept and plans\" before agreeing to move forward.  Jamal said that Pakistan's Jirga Commission Chair, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao, had already extended an invitation to Afghan Commission Chair Pir Gailani for a meeting later in February to discuss the Pakistani and Afghan ideas and reservations as a \"first step\"  (Reftel).  He said the date was not yet established.  The \"Pandora,s Box\" Problem ---------------------------  4.  (C)  Jamal worried that jirga participants might bring up issues related to the Durand Line or even Pashtun independence.  Such a risk made careful analysis of the invitation list crucial, especially for Pakistan, to whom discussion of the Durand Line was anathema.  A friend of Jamal,s from the Tribal Areas, who was present at the meeting, was even more blunt:  \"What if the jirga decides that both governments must leave the area?\" he asked.  \"What will happen?\"  Jamal replied that, while he thought the debate could be controlled, he was sure that someone would bring up the Durand Line at the jirga and that, under Pashtun tradition, the jirga would be obliged to discuss the matter.  Let's Not Call This A Jirga ---------------------------  5.  (C)  Poloff asked Jamal if Pakistani Pashtuns would agree to calling an event a jirga if Punjabis and Sindhis were  ISLAMABAD 00000674  002 OF 002   present.  He bluntly answer \"no.\"  (Comment:  -- Every Pashtun we have asked gives the same answer.  End Comment.) Jamal said another name probably could be developed, although he could not think of an appropriate Pashtun word or institution.  That said, he also expressed some concern that Pashtuns would find it inappropriate for Punjabis or Sindhis to be participating in a jirga-like meeting to discuss events in Pashtun areas.  6. (C) Comment.  We do not believe Pakistan is purposefully blocking the Pak-Aghan Jirga.  As Jamal notes, serious issues must be discussed and evaluated.  If the jirgas occur without adequate planning or without anticipating potential negative outcomes, they would be counterproductive.  Indeed, if the issue of Pashtun independence becomes a primary point of debate, Pakistan and Afghanistan could find themselves in a tougher predicament than the unenviable position they are already in. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE196000", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/12/2007 12:45", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 000695  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PARM, ETTC, IR SUBJECT: MFA RESPONDS REGARDING ALLEGED PAKISTANI PROCUREMENT OF NBC SUITS  REF: A. STATE 196000       B. ISLAMABAD 22418  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires , a.i., Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S)  On February 2, MFA (Disarmament Cell) Director Mohammad Kamran Akhtar advised PolCouns of MFA actions following post's December 11, 2006 demarche regarding information that a Pakistani firm, Westbridge Smc-Pvt. Limited,  may have purchased nuclear, biological and chemical (NBC) suits from Milad Industrial Factories in Iran (Ref A and B).  The MFA contacted the Westbridge's managing director, who indicated that his firm has not/not concluded any transactions with Milad Industrial Factories.  Westbridge had contacted Milad to look into a purchase of CBM suits, but no deal went through.  The MFA advised Westbridge's management that, although Milad is not included on the UNSCR 1737 list, ILSA sanctions could be triggered by a transaction with the company.  The Westbridge manager, who had been unaware of the ILSA regime, said his firm did not need the problems that attend business transactions with Iranian companies; he later forwarded to the MFA a copy of a letter to Milad stating that Westbridge did not intend to do business with any Iranian firms.  2.  (S)   Akhtar told PolCouns that acquiring NBC suits are not per se prohibited items, noting that Pakistan has declared its protective program to the OPCW.  That said, Akhtar listed several steps that the MFA has initiated, including:  -- a notice in the Pakistan Gazette, which has been forwarded to all relevant government entities (Customs, Commerce) and private organizations (Chamber of Commerce and Industry), regarding sanctions against Iran;  -- A message to the Pakistan Securities and Exchange Commission to advise three trading companies engaged in business with Iran to terminate such commercial relations;  --  Instruction to the Pakistan Embassy in Tehran regarding processing visa applications by individuals subject to travel restrictions; and  -- Plans to submit an updated compliance report to the UNSCR.  3. (S)  Comment:  Akhtar noted that this case was useful for the MFA, as it helped to identify private trading companies that might seek commercial contracts with Iranian firms -- a sector of the business community that the MFA had not previously targeted in its outreach on export control and UN sanctions regimes.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/14/2007 2:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000709  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2017 TAGS: PREL, PREF, PK, AF SUBJECT: REFUGEE TRIPARTITE MEETING ANNOUNCES CLOSURES, INCENTIVES, ASKS FOR HELP  REF: A. DOHERTY/AMLIN/AGUILAR E-MAIL (WITH UNHCR          REFERENCE DOCUMENTS) OF 12 FEB 07      B. DOHERTY/HOOVER/AMLIN E-MAIL OF 8 FEB 07      C. ISLAMABAD 629      D. ISLAMABAD 526  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (U) On February 7, participants of the 12th Refugee Tripartite Commission announced their decision to close four Afghan refugee camps in Pakistan in 2007. Scheduled in two phases, the closures will affect over 240,000 of Pakistan's estimated 2.4 million Afghan refugees. The Government of Pakistan pledged to contribute USD 5 million to increase repatriation packages from USD 60 to USD 100 per person. Pakistani, Afghan, and UNHCR Tripartite representatives appealed to the international community to provide additional financial support to encourage repatriations.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Phased Closures Scheduled, Added Benefits Promised --------------------------------------------- -----  2. (U) On February 7, the Refugee Tripartite Commission confirmed publicly what Pakistani government officials had told us privately: in 2007, the Government of Pakistan will close four Afghan refugee camps in two phases. In total, the closures will affect approximately 10 percent of Pakistan's refugee population. The first phase (closure of Katchagari camp and Jungle Pir Alozai camp) will affect approximately 90,000 refugees and begin on April 15. The second phase (closure of Jalozai camp and Girdi Jungle camp) will affect approximately 152,000 refugees and begin on June 15. UNHCR and the Government of Pakistan plan to relocate those not wishing to repatriate to other camps in Pakistan.  3. (U) To encourage increased repatriations, Pakistan pledged its intent to contribute USD 5 million to increase repatriation packages from USD 60 to USD 100. Also, the Commission agreed to a six-week grace period for refugees without Proof of Registration cards who still would like assistance in returning to Afghanistan. (Note: UNHCR estimates that 2.2 of the 2.4 million refugees will be registered by the end of the registration period on February 15. End Note.)  ------------------------------------------ Commission Asks Donors For More Assistance ------------------------------------------  4. (U) After the Commission meeting, UNHCR invited the diplomatic community in Islamabad for a summary of the Commission's recommendations and a question/answer period. All Commission representatives appealed to the donor community to find additional funding to encourage returns, emphasizing that increased repatriation packages are only part of the solution. UNHCR handed out statistics from its March 2005 census, which revealed that 64 percent of Afghan refugees still living in camps stated that \"lack of shelter\" is the most important reason why they do not intend to return to Afghanistan. \"Lack of a livelihood\" in Afghanistan (18.2 percent) and \"lack of security\" (17.8 percent) were the second and third most important reasons.  5. (U) The Afghan representative announced his government's intention to increase the number of its proposed development townships from 50 - 100 and he appealed to the international community to help build vocational centers, schools, hospitals, transport networks and shelters.  ISLAMABAD 00000709  002 OF 002    ----------------------------------------- Importants First Steps Taken: More Needed -----------------------------------------  6. (C) Comment: The Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan took an important first step together in their agreement for camp closures and their appeal to the international community for help in encouraging Afghan refugees to go home. With the announcements out of the way, the hard work of logistical planning for the movement of 241,000 people affected by the closures needs to begin. The broad concept, provided in ref A, is a start, but if the process is poorly managed it could create even more security concerns -- from disgruntled refugees and extremists alike. Pakistani officials at multiple levels have privately told poloffs that Afghan refugees will not be given the option to relocate within Pakistan. These statements may be more reflective of hard-line talking points intended to persuade the international community of Islamabad's resolve than actual Government of Pakistan policy, but neither interpretation bodes well for a genuine planning process.  7. (C) Most Afghan refugees living in Pakistan have done so for most of their lives -- the vast majority of the remaining refugee population originally arrived before 1985. Many will no doubt remain, especially since many know no other home and those living in or near urban areas (like the 54,000 refugees who live in Katchagari) have better access to job opportunities in Pakistan than they would in their remote agricultural districts in Afghanistan. Post has heard that refugees anticipating camp closures are already starting to buy land some distance away from the camps expecting to relocate within Pakistan -- not repatriate to Afghanistan.  8. (C) To convince the Afghan refugees to return home, the international community will need to demonstrate that security, shelter, and a livelihood are waiting for them on the other side of the border. With an expected Taliban spring offensive looming and no repatriation-focused assistance commitments yet in sight, it will be a difficult sell for the spring. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/14/2007 6:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000729  SIPDIS  SIPDIS TERREP  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2010 TAGS: ACOA SUBJECT: TEST MESSAGE  Classified By: Classified by Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (a) and (c)  1.  Test message from IPC Islamabad.  How are things going? Did I get the classify by reasons wrong?   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/14/2007 11:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000744  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2010 TAGS: ACOA SUBJECT: TEST MESSAGE NO. 2  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (a) and (c)  1.  Second test message with SIPDIS caption.       BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD22152|06STATE17780|07STATE17156|07USNATO56", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/17/2007 5:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000783  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PNAT, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN TRANSIT AGREEMENT AND SOFA UPDATE  REF: A. STATE 17156      B. USNATO 56      C. 06 STATE 17780      D. EMBASSY ISLAMABAD-RPM FAX 02/09/07      E. 06 ISLAMABAD 22152  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde per 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU)  The Office of Defense Representative-Pakistan has checked its files and enquired with its contacts and finds no record of bilateral transit/personnel agreements other than the arrangements described in Ref D.  Recipients who would like to receive scanned versions of post's various transit understandings (10 pages of documents) should send an unclassified e-mail to sheacx@state.gov and request the  SIPDIS information.  2.  (C)  On February 14, post asked the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for an update on the Government of Pakistan's evaluation of the draft SOFA agreement presented to the Government in mid-November (Ref. E).  The MFA promised an early reply. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD68", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/20/2007 13:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000828  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 TAGS: PTER, PK SUBJECT: SUICIDE BOMBER DETONATES IN QUETTA COURTROOM: 16 KILLED, 40 WOUNDED  REF: ISLAMABAD 68  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (SBU) On February 17 at approximately 1100, a suicide bomber wearing explosives around his chest entered a courtroom in the Quetta District Court complex and detonated himself, killing 16 people and wounding 40. Among those killed was senior civil judge Abdul Wahid Durrani.  2. (U) The bomber has not yet been identified, but eyewitnesses told reporters that the bomber appeared to be young -- age 20 or so -- and bearded. On February 18, Balochistan Inspector General Tariq Khosa told reporters that police teams have rounded up 36 suspects, at least 22 of whom were Afghan refugees living in and around Quetta.  3. (C) A Quetta-based media contact told poloff that by February 19 the number of arrestees had gone up to 80. In addition to the Afghans, he said, police rounded up \"the usual suspects\" known to be active in banned sectarian extremist organizations, like Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and Sipah-e-Sahiba, hoping to get some clue as to who was responsible. Although locals suspect that the Baloch Liberation Army may be responsible, he said, the bombing has the police, media, and judiciary stumped because there was no clear motive and no clear target (other than the notoriously corrupt judiciary, which may or may not have been the purpose of the bombing). The contact added that people in Quetta are now worried about what may be a dangerous new trend, as the bombing was not clearly attributable to those usually responsible for terrorist violence in Quetta: sectarian organizations and Baloch nationalists.  4. (C) Comment: No matter who was responsible for Saturday's bombing, it is one more signal of the difficult security environment in Balochistan. Inspector General Khosa is new on the job, and Interior Minister Sherpao told the Embassy that Khosa's appointment is \"crucial to improving the law and order situation in Balochistan\" (ref A). Before reporting for duty, Khosa himself told the Charge that he is concerned about the enormity of the task at hand (protect). Now that he is in place, Khosa will have to deal with Baloch nationalists, sectarian extremists, and Taliban insurgents who also may be hiding among the Afghan refugee population. Khosa has his work cut out for him, and finding the culprits responsible for Saturday's bombing will be his first real test. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE17010", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/21/2007 11:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000830  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2017 TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, OREP, AFIN, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR AMBASSADOR TAHIR-KHELI (MAR 9-19)  REF: STATE 17010  1.  American Embassy Islamabad warmly welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Ambassador Shirin Tahir-Kheli, Senior Advisor to the Secretary of State for Women's Empowerment to Pakistan from March 9-March 19. The purpose of visit is to meet with Pakistani officials, politicians, and members of civil society on issues of women's empowerment. Details on hotel arrangements and meeting requests will be sent in a subsequent email.  2.  Control Officer for the visit will be Political Officer Divya Swamy.  Ms. Swamy's contact information is as follows: Embassy: 92-51-208-2921, Mobile: 92-300-501-8813, Email: SwamyDL@state.gov. The Embassy's main switchboard number is: 92-51-208-0000 and can be reached 24 hours a day.  3. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  4.  Hotel Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts.  Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006. A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked. Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  5.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation.  6. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty  employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water. Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/22/2007 13:25", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 000845  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2017 TAGS: IN, KNNP, MCAP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: UPCOMING PAKISTANI BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S/NF)  On February 22, 2007, MFA Director (Disarmament Cell) Mohammed Kamran Akhtar advised PolCouns that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) will conduct a test of a ground-based surface-to-surface ballistic missle.  The launch window is February 23-27, 2007.  Per existing agreements with India, Akhtar said that the GOP has already notified New Delhi of this test.  Akhtar indicated that Pakistan has also advised other neighboring capitals of the test, including Beijing, Kabul and Tehran. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE202349", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/24/2007 6:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000872  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: KAWC, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP INQUIRY INTO GTMO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARDS, REPATRIATION OF DETAINEES  REF: 06 STATE 202349  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U)  This cable contains an action request -- please see para. 5.  2.  (C//NF)  During a January 26 lunch with visiting SCA DAS John Gastright, MFA officials queried emboffs regarding the prospects for the release of Pakistani detainees currently in custody at the Guantanamo Bay detention center.  During the conversation, the Pakistani diplomats referred to a note verbale addressing administrative review boards at the Guantanamo Bay detention center.  Emboffs advised the MFA officials that the Embassy's Political Section had not/not received such a diplomatic note.  On February 15, MFA (Americas) Director Mansoor Khan passed to PolCouns a copy of a note verbale dated 30 December 2006 (text below), and asked for a read-out of the most recent proceedings involving Pakistani nationals. Khan again pressed Pakistan's request for repatriation of the Guantanamo detainees.  PolCouns referred Khan to the Department's most recent guidance on the release of these detainees (Ref A), but agreed to advise the Department of the Government's continuing interest in this issue.  3.  (C)  Text of the MFA's December 2006 note verbale:  (Begin text.)  No. USA-2/16/2006 30 December 2006        The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad and has the honour to refer to communications regarding Administration Review Board (ARB) proceedings in respect of three Guantanamo detainees: (1) Mr. Mohammad Ghulam Ahmed Rabbani, (2) Mr. Saifullah Paracha, and (3) Hafes Qari Mohammad Saad Madni.        The Government of Pakistan wishes to convey that:  (a) the individuals are Pakistani nationals, (b) the Government of Pakistan may accept the individuals, (c) the relatives of individuals have been notified of Annual Review Board, and (d) on transfer from Guantanamo Bay, intelligence gathered about the activities of individuals, if significant, could be shared.        The U.S. Embassy is requested to convey the information to the relevant U.S. authorities for holding the Administration Review Boards in respect of the above three Guantanamo detainees.        The Ministry of Foreign Affairs avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the esteemed Embassy the assurance of its highest consideration.  4.  (C//NF)  Comment:  The Government of Pakistan is sensitive to the public's frustration over the continued detention of Pakistani nationals at the GTMO facilities.  MFA officials frequently ask emboffs for the status of these detainees, as they remain high-profile cases in the local press.  5.  (C)  Action request:  Post requests Department forward as much information as possible to share with the Government of Pakistan regarding the administrative review board proceedings for all Pakistani nationals currently in detention at Guantanamo Bay. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 10:37", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 000890  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR S-ES/O  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: IN, KNNP, MCAP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: UPCOMING PAKISTANI BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S/NF) On February 26, MFA Director (Disarmament Cell) Mohammed Kamran Akhtar advised PolOff that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) will conduct a test of a ground-based ballistic missle.  The launch window is February 27-March 3, 2007.  Per existing agreements with India, Akhtar said that the GOP has already notified New Delhi of this test.  Akhtar indicated that Pakistan has also advised other neighboring capitals of the test, including Beijing, Kabul and Tehran. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 12:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000895  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAKISTAN PUSHES MIDDLE-EAST PEACE INITIATIVE FORWARD   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary and comment.  Pakistani Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri convened a meeting in Islamabad of the Foreign Ministers from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia.  The session was billed as a continuation of President Musharraf's efforts to work with like-minded Muslim states to resolve the Israel-Arab dispute, to stem violence in Iraq, to stabilize Lebanon, and to de-escalate tensions over Iran's nuclear program. The fact that the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Saudi Arabia agreed to attend a Mideast-focused event hastily organized by a non-Arab state seems to indicate that, like the Pakistanis, other Muslim nations are deeply worried that sectarianism and militancy could spill out of Iraq at a dangerous rate. Paragraph 3 contains an action request: Post asks the Department to request action adressees to provide feedback on what attendees are saying about the meeting and about plans for a like-minded summit in Saudi Arabia. End summary and comment.  Pakistan Urges FM's to Solve Middle East's Problems --------------------------------------------- ------ 2. (C) On February 24, Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri called together fellow Foreign Ministers from key Islamic capitals to drive forward the Middle-East peace initiative President Musharraf initiated in January (Reftel). The Pakistani Foreign Ministry described the meeting as a \"one day consultation\" designed to prepare for a summit in Saudi Arabia. A joint-statement issued by Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and several editorial accounts of the meeting indicate that the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Indonesia, and Malaysia \"viewed with deep distress the conflict in Iraq,\" fear that sectarian tensions will spill across Iraq's borders, and worry about a \"festering\" Palestinian dispute, violence in Lebanon, and rising tensions over Iran's nuclear program.  The Foreign Ministers agreed--in principle--on the need for a Muslim world peace initiative to solve Palestinian conflict and the other crises in the region.  3. (C) This is an action request. We would appreciate any feedback from action addressees as to what the Foreign Ministers in attendance thought of the meeting and of Musharraf's initiative. We are also interested in hearing about a planned summit in Saudi Arabia, an idea Musharraf says he broached during his recent visit to Mecca. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD189|07ISLAMABAD625", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 12:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000896  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: MOSQUE DESTRUCTION STANDOFF CONTINUES TO CHALLENGE GOVERNMENT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 0625      B. ISLAMABD 22512      C. ISLAMABAD 189  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary. Four weeks in, approximately 200 female students of the Madrassa Hafza continue to occupy a children's library to protest the Islamabad Capital Development Authority's initiative to raze and relocate illegally constructed mosques.  Reporters who have visited the girls and women occupying the library tell us that the rooms surrounding the sit-in area are staffed by heavily armed male militants, including some with known ties to al-Qa'ida.  (Note: According to press reports, the Lal Mosque, which adjoins the madrassa, has in the past frequently broadcast al-Qa'ida propaganda over its loudspeakers. End note.) Ongoing negotiations with \"representatives\" of the girls/women -- and significant government concessions that include empowering a 12-member committee of ulema with making the final decision on mosque destruction -- have not swayed the leadership of the Madrassa. A desire to avoid actions that would injure or kill young girls, along with political sensitivities this election year, have motivated the government to act with extreme caution, despite growing public sentiment that the standoff poses a direct challenge to the government's writ and to its anti-militancy rhetoric.  The Interior Ministry and Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) Police have prepared for an operation to end the sit-in, bringing 700 female police officers and extra riot gear to the capital two weeks ago, but sources say senior government officials remain reticent about authorizing the action. End summary.  Girls' Sit-in, Into Week 4, Becomes Talk Of The Town --------------------------------------------- ------- 2.  (SBU) Roughly 200 female students of the Jamia Hafza Madrassa continue their four-week-old sit-in at a government owned children's library adjacent to the Lal Mosque (ref A). The girls and women are protesting the Capital Development Authority (CDA)'s initiative to demolish and relocate illegally constructed mosques and madrassas, including a portion of their own institution.  Government officials, in an attempt to settle the standoff peacefully, have engaged in a series of protracted negotiations and made significant concessions. On February 12, the Minister of Religious Affairs, negotiating on behalf of the government, announced a settlement: the girls would leave the library if the CDA would cease issuing demolition notices to illegally constructed mosques. The government has authorized a 12-member committee of ulema to decide which mosques were impinging on government road or development projects and to negotiate alternate sites to relocate such facilities.  The government also agreed to rebuild one of the mosques the CDA demolished earlier in February.  3. (SBU) The concessions did not end the standoff.  In subsequent days the girls escalated their redlines, demanding the government legalize all 81 mosques the development authority previously cited as \"illegally built on government land,\" as well as to legalize the sections of their madrassa that the government recently announced it would demolish because it exceeded the size limits allowed in the original building permit. The students also demand the enforcement of sharia in Pakistan.  Operation Iminent...For Two Weeks --------------------------------- 4. (C) Government officials from the CDA, Interior Ministry, and Capital Police tell poloffs that they have been planning an \"operation\" against the girls at the madrassa since February 2nd.  On February 5, Interior Minister Sherpao was  ISLAMABAD 00000896  002 OF 002   quoted as saying, \"we have utilized all options for a peaceful solution...we are left with no other option but using our authority to end the illegal occupation.\"  A few days later, the Interior Minister ordered 700 female police from across Punjab to come to Islamabad with riot-gear; they were to form the back-bone of the operation against the students. As of this week, no operation has been launched, but Interior Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador on February 23rd that the Ministry \"knows who the bad guys are\" among those occupying the library and is working carefully get women and girls out before engaging the heavily armed militants.  Contacts tell post that only President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz can authorize the politically sensitive operation.  5. (C) Comment. The government's inaction against the occupation --and its eagerness to negotiate away government prerogatives -- has been the talk of Islamabad's intelligencia for weeks. Ruling party, opposition, and media contacts all say the government looks weak, torn between enforcing the law and kow-towing to religious parties. The same contacts also note, though, that police actions leading to the deaths of teenage girls would be morally unacceptable, not to mention politically disasterous.  In the end, the entire episode underscores the moral depravity of the militants who are using girls as human shields--and the imperative that the government continue its fight against such extremism. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD189|07ISLAMABAD625|07ISLAMABAD897", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 12:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000897  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: MOSQUE DESTRUCTION STANDOFF CONTINUES TO CHALLENGE GOVERNMENT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 0625      B. ISLAMABD 22512      C. ISLAMABAD 189  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary. Four weeks in, approximately 200 female students of the Madrassa Hafza continue to occupy a children's library to protest the Islamabad Capital Development Authority's initiative to raze and relocate illegally constructed mosques.  Reporters who have visited the girls and women occupying the library tell us that the rooms surrounding the sit-in area are staffed by heavily armed male militants, including some with known ties to al-Qa'ida.  (Note: According to press reports, the Lal Mosque, which adjoins the madrassa, has in the past frequently broadcast al-Qa'ida propaganda over its loudspeakers. End note.) Ongoing negotiations with \"representatives\" of the girls/women -- and significant government concessions that include empowering a 12-member committee of ulema with making the final decision on mosque destruction -- have not swayed the leadership of the Madrassa. A desire to avoid actions that would injure or kill young girls, along with political sensitivities this election year, have motivated the government to act with extreme caution, despite growing public sentiment that the standoff poses a direct challenge to the government's writ and to its anti-militancy rhetoric.  The Interior Ministry and Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) Police have prepared for an operation to end the sit-in, bringing 700 female police officers and extra riot gear to the capital two weeks ago, but sources say senior government officials remain reticent about authorizing the action. End summary.  Girls' Sit-in, Into Week 4, Becomes Talk Of The Town --------------------------------------------- ------- 2.  (SBU) Roughly 200 female students of the Jamia Hafza Madrassa continue their four-week-old sit-in at a government owned children's library adjacent to the Lal Mosque (ref A). The girls and women are protesting the Capital Development Authority (CDA)'s initiative to demolish and relocate illegally constructed mosques and madrassas, including a portion of their own institution.  Government officials, in an attempt to settle the standoff peacefully, have engaged in a series of protracted negotiations and made significant concessions. On February 12, the Minister of Religious Affairs, negotiating on behalf of the government, announced a settlement: the girls would leave the library if the CDA would cease issuing demolition notices to illegally constructed mosques. The government has authorized a 12-member committee of ulema to decide which mosques were impinging on government road or development projects and to negotiate alternate sites to relocate such facilities.  The government also agreed to rebuild one of the mosques the CDA demolished earlier in February.  3. (SBU) The concessions did not end the standoff.  In subsequent days the girls escalated their redlines, demanding the government legalize all 81 mosques the development authority previously cited as \"illegally built on government land,\" as well as to legalize the sections of their madrassa that the government recently announced it would demolish because it exceeded the size limits allowed in the original building permit. The students also demand the enforcement of sharia in Pakistan.  Operation Iminent...For Two Weeks --------------------------------- 4. (C) Government officials from the CDA, Interior Ministry, and Capital Police tell poloffs that they have been planning an \"operation\" against the girls at the madrassa since February 2nd.  On February 5, Interior Minister Sherpao was  ISLAMABAD 00000897  002 OF 002   quoted as saying, \"we have utilized all options for a peaceful solution...we are left with no other option but using our authority to end the illegal occupation.\"  A few days later, the Interior Minister ordered 700 female police from across Punjab to come to Islamabad with riot-gear; they were to form the back-bone of the operation against the students. As of this week, no operation has been launched, but Interior Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador on February 23rd that the Ministry \"knows who the bad guys are\" among those occupying the library and is working carefully get women and girls out before engaging the heavily armed militants.  Contacts tell post that only President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz can authorize the politically sensitive operation.  5. (C) Comment. The government's inaction against the occupation --and its eagerness to negotiate away government prerogatives -- has been the talk of Islamabad's intelligentsia for weeks. Ruling party, opposition, and media contacts all say the government looks weak, torn between enforcing the law and kow-towing to religious parties. The same contacts also note, though, that police actions leading to the deaths of teenage girls would be morally unacceptable, not to mention politically disasterous.  In the end, the entire episode underscores the moral depravity of the militants who are using girls as human shields--and the imperative that the government continue its fight against such extremism. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 13:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000898  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, AF, PK, PREL SUBJECT: JIRGA INVITATION UPDATE  REF: A. MARTIN/GRENCIK E-MAIL OF 23 FEBRUARY 2007       B. ISLAMABAD 608      C. KABUL 528  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) On February 21, Mark Pont, the UNAMA representative in Islamabad, told us he had heard \"rumors\" that President Karzai had instructed Pir Gilani not to respond to an invitation to visit Islamabad to discuss cross-border or parallel jirgas.  Pont, who is friends with some of Gilani's relatives, was attempting to confirm or put down the rumor. On February 23, Minister of Interior (and Pakistan Jirga Commission Chairman) Sherpao informed the Ambassador that he had indeed invited Gilani to Islamabad some weeks before but had not received a reply.  He said he intended to call Gilani on February 23 or 24 to reiterate the invitation.  2. (C) After the Ambassador's meeting, Embassy Islamabad contacted Embassy Kabul to advise them of the pending phone call. Per ref A, it appears subsequent enquiries by Embassy Kabul ascertained that Pakistan's invitation had been delivered to -- and held up in -- Afghanistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and only forwarded to Gilani in late February.  3. (C) Comment: Whether it was Sherpao's intervention or Embassy Kabul's, we are happy to see the Government of Afghanistan's 25 February press release indicating that Afghanistan has accepted Pakistan's invitation to travel to Pakistan to discuss the cross-border jirgas. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD824|07KABUL559", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 13:41", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000899  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER SHERPAO SAYS PROACTIVE STEPS NECESSARY IN TRIBAL AREAS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 824      B. KABUL 559  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (S/NF) Summary: In a 23 February meeting, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao told the Ambassador that the North Waziristan Agreement must be reviewed because it is not working. Proactive leadership is necessary, he said, from the Governor down to the political agents. Northwest Frontier Province Governor Orakzai's recent statements to the press were not helpful; Sherpao intends to recommend to President Musharraf that Orakzai be removed as governor. Sherpao also thinks targeted strikes against militant leaders will increase the strength of the maliks (tribal leaders) in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and bolster security in the region. End Summary.  2. (S/NF) Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador that it is now time to review the North Waziristan Agreement, as it has not produced the hoped-for effect on security in the region. President Musharraf has tried to empower Tribal Area political agents to take steps against the insurgency, but his efforts have not borne adequate fruit. Musharraf told the political agents, for example, that the Frontier Corps is under their command and that they have an open invitation to call the President directly for support at any time, yet the political agents have not used either resource. Part of the problem, Sherpao said, is a failure of leadership by Governor Orakzai. Orakzai's recent statements to the press (ref B) are not helpful, and it is time for the President to relieve him of his position. Sherpao already has a recommendation for Orakzai's replacement: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Ehsan ul Haq. He is familiar with the issues and, as an ethnic Pashtun, will bring the right leadership to an urgent issue, Sherpao said.  3. (S/NF) Sherpao believes that directly targeting Taliban leadership in the tribal areas will boost the influence of the maliks. Primary targets, he said, are Jalaluddin Haqqani and his sons; Mullah Dadullah; Baitullah Mehsud; and three to five others. If these leaders are eliminated, Sherpao said, their supporters will lose momentum.  4. (S/NF) Sherpao also provided the Ambassador an update on the Government's crackdown on Al Rashid and Al Akhtar trusts, both designated as al Qaeda and Taliban-associated organizations by the UN 1267 sanctions committee. Sherpao provided the Ambassador with an internal government document accounting for 25 Al Rashid and 15 Al Akhtar offices that had been closed/sealed throughout the country. Sherpao added that government officials have identified 2 million Pk rupees (approximately USD 33,000) that had passed through al Akhtar from a man in Quetta to another unidentified person. The money subsequently went missing, Sherpao said, and the government is following up on it. (Note: Ref A reported on the initial closures and the surrounding media coverage. Post will report on the memo received 23 February septel. End Note.)  5. (S/NF) Comment: Ehsan ul Haq is a former head of Inter-Services Intelligence and a member of Musharraf's inner circle. He could bring new energy to an extremely complex problem. Post is considering the implications of a possible ul Haq replacement, but if the President relieves Orakzai of his duties, his replacement would be the fourth NWFP governor in two years. End Comment.  ISLAMABAD 00000899  002 OF 002   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD709", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/28/2007 9:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000954  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2017 TAGS: PREFF, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S REFUGEE REPATRIATION PLAN WORRIES UNHCR  REF: ISLAMABAD 00709  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Representatives from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)'s Geneva office met with the DCM on February 19th.  The representatives expressed concern that, in Pakistan's desire to close camps and reduce its refugee population, the government might violate UNHCR repatriation principles or begin repatriations before a proper plan was in place on both sides of the border.  The representatives worried that the international community was backing an effort to repatriate Afghans to an environment that, because of the anticipated spring offensive, would not be safe or sustainable for returnees.  UNHCR also asked the U.S. to be prepared to ask Pakistan to host additional refugees should the anticipated Taliban spring offensive lead to new Afghan refugee flows.  End summary.  2.  (C)  On February 19, UNHCR Geneva and UNHCR Islamabad representatives called on the DCM to discuss Pakistan's plan to close refugee camps and encourage refugees to return to Afghanistan.   UNHCR Geneva Director Janet Lim said that UNHCR had serious reservations about Pakistan's plans--or lack thereof--to close four Afghan refugee camps this year. In particular, UNHCR worried that its basic principles (voluntary repatriation, alternative sites for refugees unwilling/unable to return, and orderly camp closures) might be violated.  Lim asked that the U.S. be prepared to speak out if Pakistan and Afghanistan did not follow these principles when dealing with camp closures  3. (C) Lim noted that the Government of Afghanistan was unprepared and unable to accept a large inflow of refugees from Pakistan. Pakistan was looking for a \"quick-fix\" absent adequate preparation on both sides of the border, she said. To make returns sustainable and long-term, Afghanistan and the international community should invest more time and money in reconstruction and livelihood schemes.  The international community should assist the Afghan government articulate its needs relating to the repatriation process.  Potential Effects of the Spring Offensive -----------------------------------------  4. (C)  For the first time, UNHCR representatives articulated concerns over the potential for a Taliban spring offensive to create new refugee flows into Pakistan.  If a spring offensive were to create a large influx of Afghan refugees, UNHCR asked that the US help to persuade Pakistan to \"handle them graciously,\" as it had for the past 27 years.  Comment --------- 5. (C)  We, along with most of our NATO allies, continue to encourage Pakistan to close refugee camps, many of which have become breeding grounds for security problems that impact Afghanistan.  Pakistan agrees the camps should be closed, though it also understands its international obligations and has never indicated to us that it would consider violating UNHCR policies.  Indeed, the recent announcement that Pakistan would use national funds to enhance the repatriation package being offered to families who agree to return to Afghanistan signals that Pakistan is committed to voluntariness.  As UNHCR notes, though, before large numbers of refugees voluntarily return home, they will need to know they have security, shelter, and a livelihood waiting for them.  End  comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/3/2007 8:38", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001021  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/01/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK SECURITY FORCES CAPTURE HIGH-LEVEL TALIBAN LEADER MULLAH OBAIDULLAH AKHUND  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Local newspapers reported on March 2 that Pakistani security forces had captured high-ranking Taliban leader Mullah Obaidullah Akhund, along with up to five others, on February 26 in Quetta. An anonymous Pakistani official said that two of those captured with Obaidullah \"could be\" Amir Khan Haqqani, a Taliban commander in Zabul, and Abdul Bari, the former governor of Helmand province.  2.  (S/NF)  This is Obaidullah,s second arrest. He surrendered to Afghan security forces in early 2002, but was later released as part of a broad Taliban amnesty deal with the Afghan government.  3. (S/NF) Comment: This is an important arrest. Many consider Obaidullah to be the military chief of the Taliban forces and the third highest ranking Taliban member. He is also one of the most senior Taliban officials arrested since the group was ousted from power in November 2001. Obaidullah is reputed to be a key Taliban fund-raiser who was responsible for doling out operational funds. Some observers believe Obaidullah's capture could cause logistical and organizational disruptions, albeit only temporarily. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/3/2007 11:26", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001028  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2017 TAGS: IN, MNUC, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: FM KASURI'S FEBRUARY 20-21 VISIT TO NEW DELHI   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, For Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  In a March 1 meeting with PolOff, MFA Director-General for South Asian Affairs Jalil Jilani provided a readout of Foreign Minister Kasuri's February 20-21 visit to New Delhi.  Jilani previewed the upcoming March 6 anti-terror talks in Islamabad and described the nuclear accord signed during the Kasuri visit.  Other topics reported septel Notal.  End Summary.  Pakistan preparing for anti-terror talks ----------------------------------------  2.  (C)  According to Jilani, Pakistan is preparing \"seriously and sincerely\" for the March 6 Indo/Pak anti-terror talks in Islamabad, the first such talks since the two governments agreed to an \"anti-terror mechanism\" in Havana in September last year.  While the meetings will focus on \"real-time intelligence sharing,\" the Pakistani Government will also solicit the Indians' take on confronting extremism in India.  Tariq Osman Hyder, Additional Secretary of the Pak MFA's International Organization directorate, hopes the two sides can share best practices in cracking down on extremist and militant groups.  Jilani pointed out that the media will likely be clamoring for information on whether the Indians share intelligence related to the Samjhauta train bombing, and noted that Kasuri thanked Mukherjee while in Delhi for the Indian Government's cautious public posture on the tragic event.  Nuclear accord formalizes cooperation ----------------------------------  3.  (C)  On the agreement signed to reduce risks of nuclear accidents between the two countries, Jilani said that both governments had for several months wanted to re-affirm their commitment to nuclear confidence-building in the current positive bilateral atmosphere.  Jilani stated that the agreement formalized specific steps the two governments would take in the event of an accident involving their nuclear arsenals.  The agreement shall remain in force for five yers and can be extended for another five years. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD898", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/7/2007 13:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001094  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK MFA SAYS AFGHAN JIRGA COMMISSION COMING MARCH 10TH OR 11TH  REF: ISLAMABAD 898  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C//NF) In a March 7 phone call with PolOff, the Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed that the Afghan jirga commission will visit Islamabad for meetings with the Pakistani jirga commission March 10 or March 11. The Ministry is waiting for confirmation of exact dates from Kabul.  The jirga commission meetings will be a \"one day affair\" held at the Ministry of Interior and presided over by Pakistani jirga commission head and Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao.  The Ministry hopes the meeting will be followed by a press conference or a press release. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07SECSTATE21535", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/8/2007 10:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001103  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  ISN/WMDT TIM KATSAPIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, KNNP, PK, RS SUBJECT: PAKISTANI QUESTIONS ABOUT THE GLOBAL INITIATIVE TO COMBAT NUCLEAR TERRORISM  REF: A. SECSTATE 021535       B. SECSTATE 026678      C. SECSTATE 027320  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) PolOff met March 5 with Kamran Akhtar, Director of the Pakistan Foreign Ministry's Disarmament Cell, to invite the Government of Pakistan to participate in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.  Akhtar said that Pakistan supported the initiative in principle but would not sign the Statement of Principles because of concerns over the Terms of Reference.  Akhtar stated that the Terms of Reference, while exempting NPT-signatories' military facilities from inspection, do not similarly exempt non-NPT signatories' military facilities.  He noted that if the Terms of References were re-worded to include an exemption for non-NPT states' military facilities, Pakistan would strongly consider joining the initiative.  Akhtar further noted that if no such exemption could be included, Pakistan would consider enjoying \"observer status,\" if offered.  Akhtar also suspected India and Israel had similar concerns.  2.  (C) As instructed in ref A, post approached the Russian Embassy to propose jointly approaching the Government of Pakistan about the Global Initiative.  The Russian Embassy did not respond.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD637", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/11/2007 11:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001124  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S CHIEF JUSTICE SUSPENDED  REF: ISLAMABAD 637  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: On March 9, President Pervez Musharraf suspended Pakistan's Chief Justice of the Supreme Court Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry on various corruption charges. Chaudhry had developed a reputation for judicial activism during his short time on the bench and ruled against the Government of Pakistan in several high-profile cases. Islamabad's legal and media circles are abuzz with speculation about what motivated the President, but genuine facts are scarce.  Whether this is a case of high-level corruption or part of a broader struggle for control of the judiciary, the hands-on manner in which President Musharraf went about suspending Chaudhry has seized the attention of the media.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ---------- MUSHARRAF SUSPENDS CHIEF JUSTICE, ACTING CHIEF SWORN IN --------------------------------------------- ----------  2. (C) Around 11:00 a.m. on March 9, President Pervez Musharraf summoned Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry to Army House in Rawalpindi to inform him that the President was suspending him as Chief Justice \"for misconduct, misuse of authority, and actions prejudicial to the dignity of the office of the chief justice of Pakistan.\"  Embassy contacts report that Chaudhry spent over five hours at Army House and that he refused to resign on the spot.  When Chaudhry attempted to return to his office, security personnel escorted him home.  Media and Embassy contacts have told PolOffs privately that Chaudhry is under unofficial house arrest.  He served only 21 months of a term that was supposed to last until 2013.  3. (C) After meeting with Chaudhry, Musharraf appointed Justice Javed Iqbal as Acting Chief Justice.  Iqbal was third in line for the position -- the second in line, Justice Rana Bhagwandas, a Hindu approaching retirement, was reportedly in India on leave.  (Comment: It is unclear whether Bhagwandas will assume the Acting role when he returns to Pakistan. Bhagwandas is known as an honest judge.  If he is skipped in favor of Iqbal -- who many see as a more malleable justice -- opposition and media groups may call foul. End Comment.)  4. (SBU) Iqbal hastily took the oath of office and brought the Supreme Judicial Council into session.  The Supreme Judicial Council, which is responsible for hearing complaints of misconduct against high-level judges, is composed of the Supreme Court's three senior-most judges and two Chief Justices from the country's four Provincial High Courts. (Note:  That the Chief Justices from Karachi and Lahore, who will sit on the Supreme Judicial Council, happened to be in Islamabad when all of this transpired has only fed conspiracy theorists' suspicions. End Note.)  The Supreme Judicial Council's first order of business under Iqbal was to call Chaudhry to a March 13 session to answer the charges against him.  There is precedent for such a move -- Chaudhry is the fifth judge in Pakistan's history to face this type of \"presidential reference.\" In the previous four cases, two judges resigned and the other two were expelled from the high court.  --------------------- AN ACTIVIST JUDGE ---------------------  5. (C) Chaudhry had brought a streak of judicial activism to  ISLAMABAD 00001124  002 OF 002   the Chief Justice position, making several decisions that observers believe irritated the government, including:  -- Pressing the government to find and release 41 missing persons assumed to have \"disappeared\" at the hands of intelligence agencies. -- Blocking the privatization of Pakistan Steel Mills. -- Canceling the lease of an Islamabad public park to a private developer. -- Pursuing cases alleging that the government overcharged for petroleum products.  6. (SBU) Negative stories about Chaudhry and, more specifically, his son Arsalan Iftikhar Chaudhry seemed to increase in recent weeks.  Local media reported January 30 that a high court lawyer had lodged a complaint against Arsalan with the National Accountability Board (NAB) for corruption and abuse of power (reftel).  In mid-February, pro-government lawyer and television anchor Naeem Bokhari wrote an open letter to Chief Justice Chaudhry alleging that Arsalan used his position to secure government jobs and special treatment.  7. (C) Comment:  In this land of conspiracy theories, a new one has blossomed every 30 seconds since the announcement of the Chief Justice's suspension.  Speculation focuses on why Musharraf personally intervened to suspend the Chief Justice rather than seeking other routes, such as impeachment or a criminal investigation.  Until more facts become available, such speculation should be taken with a healthy helping of salt.  End Comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/12/2007 13:32", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001147  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR F AMBASSADOR TOBIAS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: OPERATIONAL PLAN REVIEW - PAKISTAN  1. We look forward to the upcoming Operational Plan Review for Pakistan, scheduled to take place in Washington on March 13.  2. In advance of that review, let us quickly highlight two items that were noted in the transmittal memo for our Operational Plan in early February: First, the importance of maintaining the annual budget support line item at $200 million; and, second, the importance of moving forward on a new security and development initiative for the frontier areas bordering Afganistan, starting with the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).  3. The Operational Plan submitted in early February used control figures provided by Washington within the context of a Continuing Resolution that necessarily had to anticipate \"worst case\" scenarios.  We understand that the Continuing Resolution that was actually approved by Congress provides for a somewhat more robust foreign assistance budget, hopefully allowing for some further flexibility as the Operational Plan review unfolds.  4. For Pakistan, two issues are especially important:  -- CASH TRANSFER: FY 2007 marks the third year of a five-year commitment of ongoing U.S. assistance to Pakistan.  For the last two years, we have maintained the budget support part of that commitment at $200 million, with all obligations occurring prior to the end of the Pakistan fiscal year on June 30.  The budget support also provides an important foundation for an annual dialogue on shared economic objectives.  In addition, the Government of Pakistan annually provides the equivalent of $200 million in local currency to help meet its commitment to increase expenditures in health, education and welfare.  Given initial control figures from Washington, the initial Operating Plan shows a budget support of $152 million this fiscal year.  We very much hope that as part of the Operational Plan review, this figure can now be increased to $200 million.  -- SUPPORT FOR FATA: The initial Operational Plan transmittal memo noted that additional funding might be available for FATA later in the year, possibly entailing \"subsequent adjustments in the current operational plan.\"  Under any scenario, the Operational Plan needs to be adjusted to launch initial activities in FATA under the \"peace and security\" objective implemented by USAID, including a new initiative focused on capacity building in key FATA-related institutions, including the FATA Secretariat and the new FATA Development Authority (FDA).  5. Over the past several months, the country team has developed extensive documentation on a proposed initiative to support the Government of Pakistan's own Sustainable Development Plan, which is about to be officially issued. This documentation includes a strategy for supporting Government of Paksitan efforts in FATA discussed in Washington in December and a program summary aimed at developing a new, stand-alone Strategic Objective within the peace and security area of the Operational Plan that is now being finalized.  Again, as the Operational Plan discussion takes place this week, we are firmly convinced that adjustments need to be made in the current Operational Plan to ensure that a new multi-year development initiative is launched in FATA in FY 2007 rather than having to wait until FY 2008.   ISLAMABAD 00001147  002 OF 002   6. Thanks again for your efforts to undertake the challenging and important task of consolidating foreign assistance budgets and ensuring that country teams launch complementary programs that focus on important national objectives.  This has definitely taken place within the Islamabad country team at this critical juncture in the U.S.-Pakistan partnership. Again, we very much hope that the two adjustments envisaged when we submitted the initial Operating Plan in early February -- one focused on the budget support line item, the other on a FATA intiative appearing under the peace and security objective -- will be made during the upcoming Washington review.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1124", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/13/2007 14:51", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001176  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/13/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: NATIONWIDE PROTESTS FOLLOW CHIEF JUSTICE'S SUSPENSION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 01124       B. ISLAMABAD 637  Classified By: Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and(d)  1.  (C) Summary. President Musharraf's March 9 suspension of Supreme Court Chief Justice Ifthikar Chaudhry has ignited the ire of Pakistan,s legal community and consumed the attention of the press and intelligentsia.  Hundreds -- perhaps thousands -- of lawyers and other sympathizers protested nationwide on March 12 and 13.  The protests were the first time in recent memory that progressives like the PPP's Aitzaz Ahsan could be seen should-to-shoulder with leaders of the religious parties.  Legal groups and opposition parties have called for a general strike in many cities for March 14, while opposition parties are organizing a nationwide strike for March 16.  Some members of the ruling PML-Q and MQM coalition tell us they are embarrassed by President Musharraf's actions. Some of the most respected members of the Government, including the Attorney General and the Minister of Interior, have been noticeably silent throughout the controversy.  The March 12 decision of the government to close two private television stations for 20 minutes after they ran talk shows critical of the President's actions toward the Chief Justice have only added fuel to people's anger.  End Summary.  Angry Lawyers In The Streets -------------------------------  2. (SBU) Pakistan's legal community, the most well-organized unit of civil society in Pakistan, is furious about President Musharraf's suspension of the Supreme Court Chief Justice. On March 12, protesters in Lahore, Karachi, Islamabad, and smaller cities blocked major thoroughfares, threw stones and other objects at the police, and boycotted the courts.  In Lahore on March 12, protesters clashed with police, leading to several injuries from \"baton-charges\". The protests paralyzed the business district for five hours and received widespread press attention.  Demonstrations continued in Lahore, Islamabad, and Karachi on March 13th.  During the March 13 Islamabad protests, senior opposition politicians Qazi Hussain Ahmed (Jamaat-e Islami), Fazlur Rahman (Jamiat-e Ulema-e Islam), and Aitzaz Ahsan (PPP), and other representatives of civil society organizations joined the lawyers.  The MMA, PML-N, and PPP all plan large protests on Friday.  3.  (U)  The Supreme Judicial Council hearing the complaint against the Chief Justice met March 13 in closed session for one hour and 45 minutes and then adjourned.  Afterward, Aitzaz Ahsan, who is representing the justice, told the press he had filed a publication with the Supreme Judicial Council objecting to its composition and to the \"in camera\" nature of the proceedings.  Universal Agreement: President Handled This Badly ------------------------------------------ 4.  (C)  Four days after the suspension, and without a detailed explanation from the President, the rumor mill is offering up theories of the Musharraf,s motivation that range from his wanting a malleable court that will rule in his favor on election-oriented questions to his being angry over court decisions that ended his privatization plan for Pakistan Steel.  The few Musharraf supporters who have spoken publicly in favor of the President,s actions have generally not helped the President.  Some, for instance, have cited as  ISLAMABAD 00001176  002 OF 002   an example of the Chief Justice's corruption his demand for an armored vehicle when he visited Quetta.  (Comment:  An armored vehicle for the Chief Justice of Pakistan, particularly given recent violence against jurists, does not seem particularly profligate.  End Comment.)  5. (C) A pulse of journalists, lawyers, and politicians from across Pakistan suggests that there is near-universal agreement among the elites that President Musharraf mishandled the Chief Justice's fate.  PML President Chaudhry Shujaat told Ambassador March 13 that neither he nor the Prime Minister had been told anything about Musharraf,s plan to suspend the justice.  Minister of Health Mohammed Naseer Khan told Ambassador that the suspension was \"very bad\" and had given the opposition a \"stick to whack us with.\"  PML leaders in Punjab told Consulate Lahore that they were worried Musharraf's actions would reflect negatively on them.  Their sentiment was echoed by other coalition partners, who said Musharraf's silence on the issue was handing the opposition an opportunity to unite.  6. (C) Opposition politicians, meanwhile, criticized Musharraf's actions as another step towards undermining Pakistan's institutions of democracy.  PML-N MNA Tehmina Daultana  told us that \"Musharraf is destroying the foundations of this country and bringing the institutions under his foot one at a time.\"  Liaquat Baloch, JI's Deputy Amir, said the MMA believed Musharraf's actions were unconstitutional and that Musharraf only suspended the Chief Justice because he had personal motives. Others echoed the questioning of Musharraf's personal involvement, saying that corruption allegations against judicial and government officials are rampant, but Musharraf normally does not intervene.  7. (C)  The one thing that lawyers and Musharraf supporters seem to agree on is that Musharraf was technically within his constitutional rights to suspend the justice.  The problem, most note, is optics and transparency.  The President,s intervening so personally, rather than simply referring the charges to the Judicial Council, looks high-handed and un-democratic.  Meanwhile, the decision to place Chaudhry under unofficial house-arrest and to deny him contact with the outside world seems, to some contacts, petty.  As MQM Deputy Convenor Farooq Sattar told us, \"to file a reference against the sitting Justice is Musharraf's discretion, but restricting his movements and cutting him off from visitors, his lawyers, and his family is raising people's hackles.\" (Note:  Reports late on March 13 indicate that restrictions on Chaudhry,s contacts with the outside world may have lessened.  End Note.)  Comment ------- 8. (C) The legal community and the opposition are unlikely to back down easily.  A combination of a transparent Supreme Judicial Council hearing, a public explanation by Musharraf, and a tempered reaction by law enforcement officials to protests on March 16 could cool some of the anger. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/14/2007 13:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001194  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: AITZAZ AHSAN ON HIS LATEST CLIENT:  THE CHIEF JUSTICE   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On March 13, Aitzaz Ahsan, a lead attorney for now \"suspended\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, told Ambassador that the five-day-old saga of the Chief Justice was \"maximum political theater.\"  Seeming to relish his role in the drama (it is hard to turn on the television without seeing Aitzaz these days), Pakistan's top civil rights attorney said the Supreme Judicial Council hearings \"would be fun.\"  2.  (C)  Aitzaz' tactic in the hearings will be to prove that, even if his client is guilty of ethics violations, some of the justices on the SJC are guilty of the same or even worse offenses.  On the other hand, the government's prosecutor, the Attorney General, is universally held in high esteem.  (Note:  During recent Supreme Court cases regarding missing persons in Pakistan, the Attorney General quietly sided with petitioners demanding information from the security services on missing family members.  He told us he was obligated to do so as an officer of the court and a supporter of the rule of law.  End Note.)  3.  (C)  Aitzaz described the opening session of the Supreme Judicial Council as \"bizarre.\"  The \"in camera\" proceedings took place in a salon, with all participants sitting on sofas.  Justice Chaudhry traded accusations with the five justices on the Council, a common one being \"If I ever intervened to help my son, you've done it twice over.\" Aitzaz described the proceedings/sparring as \"preliminary,\" noting the real hearings will begin on Friday, March 16. Aitzaz' first order of business will be to have the proceedings moved into a public setting.  He noted that, while the 1970-1971 proceedings against Sheikh Shaukat Aziz had been held in camera, the defendant had requested such an arrangement.  Chaudhry wanted public proceedings, and Aitzaz seemed to believe he would prevail on that score.  (Note: Opening the hearings to the public is a chief demand of the bar associations that have protested throughout Pakistan this week.  End Note.)  4.  (C)  Despite Aitzaz' status as a senior PPP leader, his goal is to prevent the hearings from being hijacked by politicians, particularly from the religious parties.  (MMA politicians have been prominent in pro-Chaudhry protests around the country.)  Aitzaz said his defense posture would be to attack the judges on the Supreme Judicial Council, not Musharraf.  Aitzaz also said it was important not to let this issue be hijacked by the religious parties.  5.  (C)  Comment:  While many observers agree with Aitzaz' low opinion of several of the justices on the Supreme Judicial Council, the litigators themselves -- Aitzaz and the Attorney General -- are first rate lawyers, scholars, and supporters of the civil society.  Like the rest of Pakistan, we will be watching the Chief Justice's story play out in the Supreme Judicial Council.  End Comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/16/2007 12:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001234  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  FROM AMBASSADOR CROCKER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PNAT, PREF, PREL SUBJECT: VIOLENCE ERUPTS AT DEMONSTRATIONS OVER CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Fighting broke out between the police and demonstrators in front of Pakistan's Supreme Court the afternoon of March 16, the second day of the Supreme Judicial Council's proceeding against Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry.  Demonstrations in other cities around Pakistan were tense but less violent than the widely-telecast confrontations in Islamabad.  (Note:  Unofficial estimates of crowd size were less than a thousand total in various locations in Islamabad; about 1,200 in Peshawar; about 1,000 in Karachi; and less than 1,000 in Lahore.  End Note.)  RSO Islamabad reports that demonstrators in Islamabad self-segregated, with representatives of religious parties forming one group, lawyers another, and civil society and mainline political groups another.  Television reports showed demonstrators near the Supreme Court throwing rocks at police, who responded by firing tear gas into crowds of several hundred protesters.  Television stations carried footage of protesters beating a police officer and throwing rocks.  (Note:  According to RSO, only the religious parties attacked the police.  End Note.)  Press reports indicate that at least two journalists were injured in the disturbances.  A PPP contact called the Embassy from the protests and said that the PPP was present to show solidarity with the Chief Justice, not to harass the police or to mingle with the religious parties.  2.  (U)  Late in the afternoon, police stormed the Islamabad office of GEO television.  The Lahore office of GEO continued to broadcast while lead reporter Hamid Mir, in Islamabad, described police beating employees and breaking equipment. Shortly after Mir went off the air, Minister of Information Durrani issued a public statement saying the police had had no right to enter the newsroom.  3.  (C)  Police took great pains to keep protests small. Roadblocks around the perimeter of Islamabad and every few miles after that turned back almost anyone who might be a protester.  Police arrested or restricted the movements of lawyers and political opposition leaders overnight and throughout the day.  In Lahore, police arrested hundreds of attorneys and placed Jamaati Islami leader Liaqat Baloch and PPP-P leader Qasim Zia under house arrest.  After the Lahore protests turned out to be relatively calm, police released the lawyers.  In Islamabad, police arrested MMA leaders Qazi Hussain Ahmed and Hafiz Hussain Ahmed as they marched towards the Supreme Court after Friday prayers.  PPP reported that police arrested several PPP members at the site of Islamabad protests.  PML-N reported that 17 of their leaders were under arrest.  4.  (SBU)  RSOs throughout Pakistan reported that no official Americans were injured in the protests.  We have received no information of any Americans injured in the demonstrations. We are aware of no demonstrations scheduled for the weekend.  5.  (C)  Comment:  By Islamabad standards, these demonstrations have been small and relatively non-violent. This is especially true when compared to February 2006 demonstrations associated with the Danish cartoon controversy.  Thus far, the mainline opposition parties have taken pains not to be seen cooperating with the religious parties in the protests.  Indeed, the Chief Justice controversy has not galvanized the opposition into a unified entity nor has it captured widespread support.  We shall continue to monitor this situation and report as appropriate.  End Comment CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE32649", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/17/2007 11:17", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001240  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, KNNP SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR STATE/DOE DELEGATION MARCH 19-23  REF: STATE 32649  1. American Embassy Islamabad grants country clearance and warmly welcomes the visit of SCA/RA Director John Schlosser and ISN/RA Kahtryn Schultz from the Department of State, and Kelly Cummins, Anne Kohnen, Jimmie Collins, Chis Landers, and Greg Herdes from the Department of Energy to Islamabad March 19-23, 2007.  2.  Control Officers for the visit will be Political Officers Tom West and Mike Fernandez.  Mr. West can be reached at 92-51-208-2294; mobile: 92-300-501-2173; email: westTW@state.gov.  3. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  4.  Hotel Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts.  Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006. A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked. Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  5.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation.  6. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty  employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  ISLAMABAD 00001240  002 OF 002   Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2007 2:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 001267  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: AS PROTESTS OVER CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY CONTINUE, GOVERNMENT SOFTENS APPROACH  REF: ISLAMABAD 1234 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Protests over the proceedings against Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry continued over the weekend, drawing an estimated crowd of 10,000 - 12,000 in Lahore on Saturday. The protests continue to be minimally violent by Pakistani standards. The Chief Justice controversy continues to dominate headlines and conversations, and a nationwide \"wheeljam strike\" is planned for March 21, the next scheduled day for the Supreme Judicial Council's hearing against Chaudhry. President Musharraf called an emergency meeting of senior government officials late March 18 and reportedly chastised them for not providing sufficient public support. At the meeting, he outlined his strategy to deal with the crisis. Musharraf confirmed that Justice Rana Bhagwandas -- the second most senior judge on the Supreme Court -- will assume the role of Acting Chief Justice upon his return from abroad March 23. Throughout the crisis, the Pakistan People's Party has remained low-key. The silence has been partly to allow lawyers' associations to take the lead, but the People's Party is preparing to assume a more public role. Both the Minister of Interior and the Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General acknowledged to Ambassador that holding police accountable for the raid on Geo T.V. will be important. Thus far, the U.S. Government's low-key approach to the controversy has been appropriate, as Pakistan's civil society has risen to the perceived challenge to a free press and judiciary, leaving the U.S. out of the headlines. End Summary.  ----------------- Protests Continue -----------------  2. (U) Protests continued over the weekend and into the week in Lahore, Karachi, and Peshawar. On March 17, demonstrations in Lahore drew 10,000 - 12,000 people. At one point, lawyers began to throw stones and other items at police, who responded in kind and ultimately resorted to baton charges, tear gas, and arrests to subdue the crowd. Sporadic demonstrations continued throughout Lahore on March 19, but no roadblocks or other disruptions were reported. Overall, the protests have been minimally violent by Pakistan standards, especially compared to last year's demonstrations over the Danish cartoons.  3. (U) Protests in Karachi and Peshawar continued throughout the weekend as well, but have been more subdued. A Karachi Bar Association demonstration planned for March 19 was postponed to March 20 due to rain. In the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), lawyers continued to protest on March 17 and March 19 with symbolic one hour strikes at courts in Peshawar and other key cities in the province. (Comment: With the NWFP's MMA government having received a fair degree of criticism in recent months over the deteriorating law and order situation, Peshawar observers expect that the NWFP's provincial government to work hard to maintain a peaceful atmosphere at demonstrations over the Chief Justice's removal. End Comment.)  4. (SBU) A nationwide \"wheeljam protest\" (in which no traffic is allowed to transit major city routes and commercial activities cease) has been announced for March 21, the next scheduled day for the Supreme Judicial Council's hearing  ISLAMABAD 00001267  002 OF 003   against Chaudhry. Political party representatives tell us that police are arresting party organizers in the lead up to the protests, which are scheduled for all cities. Pakistan People's Party officials are expecting routes into Islamabad to be blocked ahead of the March 21 demonstration, and are telling their members not already in Islamabad to remain (and demonstrate) where they are and not to bother coming to the capital city.  ------------------------------------------- President Musharraf Calls Emergency Meeting -------------------------------------------  5. (C) On March 18, President Musharraf called together senior government officials and coalition partners for a hastily-arranged meeting. Press reports and outside observers reported that Musharraf was unhappy that senior government officials had not sufficiently supported him in public, and directed them to fight the opposition's efforts to recast the proceedings against Justice Chaudhry as a crisis. We have already seen government officials carrying out their marching orders to enhance public outreach.  Late on March 19, the Foreign Secretary convened Ambassador to hear the Government's side of the story, which we will report septel.  6. (C) Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General Senator Mushahid Hussain, who attended the meeting, told us that Musharraf outlined his strategy to deal with the crisis. Musharraf confirmed that the ban against the Geo television program \"Aaj Kamran Khan Kay Saath\" (\"Today With Kamran Khan\") will be lifted and that Musharraf will appear on Khan's March 19 show. Musharraf also said that Justice Rana Bhagwandas -- the second most senior judge on the Supreme Court -- will assume the role of Acting Chief Justice and, if he wishes, the head of the Supreme Judicial Council on his March 23 return from India. Although this will slow down the process, Mushahid said, it is important to ensure the credibility of the process and not allow it to become politicized.  ------------------------------------------ Pakistan People's Party Supports Protests, But Public Profile is Low ------------------------------------------  7. (C) Notable in its absence, the Pakistan People's Party has maintained a low public profile since the beginning of the protests. Central Information Secretary Sherry Rehman told PolOff that this has been partly deliberate, since lawyers' associations (many of whose members also belong to the party) have asked that they be allowed to take the lead in the fight against the government. (Note: Party officials estimate that 80-100 Peoples Party members are currently behind bars, but those are mostly lawyers who were demonstrating as law association members. By contrast, Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) officials estimate that they have approximately 57 people behind bars as a result of the protests. End Note.) Even though the lawyers asked to take the lead, they will soon tire, according to Rehman. The People's Party is ramping up to fill the gap. PPP leaders have cleared their calendars for Thursday, Rehman said, because they assume they will be arrested during protests planned for March 21.  8. (C) The People's Party is wary of allowing the protests to play to the advantage of the religious parties, Rehman said,  ISLAMABAD 00001267  003 OF 003   so while there has been contact with the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal religious alliance, coordination has been minimal. Public speculation that the People's Party's silence over the judicial crisis is a signal of an electoral deal with the Musharraf government is wrong, Rehman added. The deal is off, as of now. If Benazir Bhutto were to make any arrangement with Musharraf at this point, she said, workers would leave the party.  --------------------------------------------- ---------------- Government Officials Tell Ambassador Accountability Important --------------------------------------------- ----------------  10. (C) On March 19, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao told the Ambassador that the police raid on Geo television station was a result of mass confusion after a student radical group started throwing rocks at police from inside the Geo building. When the police stormed the building in response, one of the protesters grabbed a police officer, and then the situation got out of control. Nevertheless, he agreed that accountability for the incident was important. Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General Senator Mushahid Hussain told the Ambassador that he knows the whole Chief Justice situation looks bad, and it is a result of bad advice given to President Musharraf by the Law Minister and the Attorney General. Mushahid agreed with the Ambassador that the Law Minister should be sacked and suggested that Islamabad's Deputy Inspector General of Police should probably be fired as well. Mushahid closed by saying that the government will now have to bend over backwards to prove that there is no judicial crisis and that justice will be done.  ------------------------------ Government Hears Public Outcry ------------------------------  11. (C) Comment: The Chief Justice controversy has shown that elements of Pakistan's civil society are willing to step up to the plate when they see a perceived threat to their constitutional freedoms. Punishment is likely for higher-level police officials who directed the raid against Geo television station, and there likely will be more government affirmations of respect for press freedom. Most importantly, it appears that the Government of Pakistan is anxious to place responsibility for resolving the Chief Justice's suspension into the lap of the Supreme Judicial Council.  12. (C) Comment, cont. The Government appears to be reacting in a measured way to counteract public outcry, but no one is predicting a prompt resolution of the crisis. Without the distraction of the Cricket World Cup (Pakistan lost to Ireland March 18 -- a huge blow to national pride) the media will continue to focus on the Chief Justice controversy. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2007 7:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001270  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: FOREIGN SECRETARY CONVENES AMBASSADOR TO DISCUSS CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan convened Ambassador March 19 to discuss the controversy surrounding President Musharraf's decision to make the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court \"non-functional.\"  Khan stressed that Pakistan was not in a \"crisis situation.\"  He admitted that government officials had made mistakes -- especially the attack on the Islamabad office of Geo television -- but stressed that other issues were being misrepresented.  He noted that the situation was \"difficult\" and that some agitators wanted to \"inflame\" the population.  2.  (C)  Contradicting press reports, Khan said that Musharraf had not invited the Chief Justice Iftikhar to Musharraf's army residence to discuss the charges against the judge.  According to Khan, the Chief Justice had requested the meeting to ask the President to help stop rumors that were circulating about the Chief Justice.  At that meeting, President Musharraf told Iftikhar that the government had received a \"reference\" (official complaint) against the judge.  He gave the reference to the justice, who took considerable time studying the document.  During this time, the President asked the Prime Minister to join the two men at the Camp Office.  3.  (C)  Because the Chief Justice had now read the reference, Musharraf decided it was necessary to act on the reference immediately.  This was, according to Khan, the President's constitutional obligation.  4.  (C)  The Government did not deny that some aspects of security had been mishandled.  The President had apologized for the Geo incident and had agreed to be interviewed for a prime time broadcast the evening of March 19 to demonstrate his commitment to a free press.  The President planned to stress that the government did not intend to limit press freedom.  (Note:  The interview occurred as scheduled.  Post will provide transcript septel.  End Note.)  5.  (C)  Khan also emphasized that the government did not intend to curtail the judiciary's freedom.   The government would abide by constitutional and legal prerogatives.  As such, the government was prohibited from providing details of the reference against the justice, though Iftikhar and his lawyers were free to release the document to the public, if they so chose.  6.  (C)  FS Khan reported that Justice Bhagwandas would return from abroad on March 22 or 23.  He would become Acting Chief Justice upon his return.  Khan said that Bhagwandas could choose to assume the chairmanship of the Supreme Judicial Council if he wished, though he was also free to ask another high court judge to lead the proceedings against the Chief Justice.  Khan emphasized that it was Musharraf's intention to distance himself from the entire matter and let the Council's proceedings develop without interference  7.  (C)  Since the Foreign Secretary had initiated the discussion of this internal legal and political issue, the Ambassador wished to respond with a few comments.  He noted that the U.S. had been as low key and restrained as possible in our own public commentary.  The restraint had not necessarily been easy, given the amount of coverage and opinion in the U.S. press on this controversy.  8.  (C)  Overall, the government's handling of this issue had not made things easy for its friends.  Looking ahead, the secrecy of the reference process and the decision to hold hearings in camera were making a difficult situation worse. The lack of transparency fed the belief that the government  ISLAMABAD 00001270  002 OF 002   was hiding the true reasons for its actions against the Chief Justice.  In particular, secrecy was fueling the belief that the President had acted against the Chief Justice because the government was unhappy over high court decisions on missing persons or the decision against a privatization program.  To quiet these rumors -- and to restore the civil society's faith in the government -- the Supreme Judicial Council process must be perceived as fair, impartial, and without prejudice.  9.  (C)  The Ambassador also stressed the need for accountability.  Western commentators would not deem the firing of a dozen police constables and a police inspector a credible response to the attack on Geo T.V.  Commentators would be watching to see if senior officers were held accountable.  Khan responded that the lower level police may not have actually been ordered to enter Geo.  He had heard rumors that the police had pursued demonstrators into the office or otherwise been provoked into entering.  (Note: Earlier in the day, the Interior Minister gave the same account to the Ambassador.  End Note.)  10.  (C)  As he had earlier in the day with the Minister for the Interior, the Ambassador stressed that both the police and demonstrators needed to show restraint.  The Ambassador worried that some demonstrators might be trying to provoke violent reactions from the police, which would in turn possibly bring out more demonstrators.  The police should behave in a professional manner, he noted, acknowledging the difficulty in such an approach.  (Note:  Mission officials continue to stress the same need for restraint with opposition and civil society groups.  End Note.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2007 13:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001279  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: IN, MNUC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTANI PRESSURE ON IRAN  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  President Musharraf, Foreign Minister Kasuri, and Foreign Secretary Khan have all recently emphasized to Ambassador that one purpose of Pakistan's \"Moderate Muslim States\" initiative is to pressure Iran to modify its behavior.  Pakistan believes that by not inviting Iran to the February 24 meeting of Muslim Foreign Ministers in Islamabad, the other participants (Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia) have made clear that Tehran must moderate its policies on nuclear development and foreign relations and that it should adopt the Beirut Declaration on the Israel-Palestinian conflict.  Foreign Minister Kasuri says he has told Iranian Foreign Minister Mottaki that Iran must change its unrealistic and destabilizing stances toward Israel, the U.S., and nuclear issues.  Kasuri reports that Iran is flexible on some issues, \"but it absolutely will not break ranks on nuclear enrichment.\"  2.  (C)  President Musharraf visited Tehran in February as part of his outreach to Muslim nations.  According to Khan, Musharraf met with Ahmedinejad to explain the broad parameters of his initiative and to \"clearly convey concerns that Iranian confrontation (with the U.S. and the West) must be prevented.\"  Ahmedinejad responded that Iran was not responsible for tensions.  He also denied Iran was supporting sectarianism in Iraq.  3.  (C)  Musharraf told the Ambassador that, in a phone conversation following the Islamabad Ministerial, Ahmedinejad expressed unhappiness over Iran's exclusion.  Musharraf said he responded that a common point of departure for the seven participating states was the 2002 Beirut Summit Declaration on a two state solution to the Palestinian issue, which Iran rejects.  He said he urged Ahmedinejad to reconsider Iran's position.  Kasuri told the Ambassador separately that the Pakistani Ambassador in Tehran was called in to receive a complaint about the ministerial. The Iranian Ambassador in Islamabad delivered the same complaint.  Kasuri said the Ambassadors received the same reply as Musharraf gave Ahmedinejad.  4.  (C)  Foreign Minister Kasuri and Foreign Secretary Khan recently told Ambassador that Pakistan's initiative was probably one motivator spurring Iran to visit Saudi Arabia in early March.  (Comment:  The connection between the Musharraf initiative and the Ahmedinejad trip to Mecca could take two forms:  The Iranian President may have wanted to convince the Saudis not to cooperate with the Pakistanis; or he may have been trying to prove that he is not averse to dialogue.  End Comment.)  ------------------------------------- Aman 07:  Another Message -------------------------------------  5.  (C)  Pakistani leaders have intimated that one purpose of the recent Aman 07 Naval Exercise was to demonstrate to Iran that the U.S., Pakistan, China, and other countries are able to cooperate militarily.  Mission's Defense Attache's Office and the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan have confirmed that Iran did not/not participate as observers in Aman '07 and that reporting in other channels claiming that Pakistan invited Iran to observe the exercise is inaccurate.  --------------------------------------------- --------------- Moderate Muslim States Initiative:  Its Genesis --------------------------------------------- ----------------  6.  (C)  In a March 16 meeting, Foreign Secretary Khan explained to Ambassador the roots of Musharraf's initiative. He said that various recent visitors to Islamabad, including the King of Jordan, had told Musharraf that like-minded nations should find a way to combat the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.  Khan reported that naysayers, particularly in the Foreign Ministry, warned the President against involving Pakistan in the labyrinth of Middle East problems.  Musharraf countered doubters by asking them four questions: --Is the situation in the Middle East not deteriorating?  ISLAMABAD 00001279  002 OF 002   --Is Pakistan not involved or effected? --If the situation implodes -- e.g. in Iran -- would it not have disastrous consequences on Pakistan? --So should we stand still with folded hands?  7.  (C)  According to Khan, Musharraf began his initiative by contacting Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria.  (Note: Pakistan ultimately excluded Syria from the February Foreign Ministers' meeting because Syria was not adequately committed to playing a helpful role in the Middle East.  End Note.) The original countries agreed on broad parameters on two main issues:  the need for a specific timeline for the establishment of a Palestinian state; and the need to play a constructive role in tamping down sectarian tensions in Iraq.  8.  (C)  Khan said that, at the February 24 meeting of Foreign Ministers from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia, countries were reluctant to \"push Iran\" and Arab representatives seemed uncomfortable over non-Arab countries involving themselves in Middle East issues.  Musharraf responded that, if Muslim countries were serious about resolving Iraq and the Palestinian question, participants should put their reservations aside. Ultimately, all seven Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement viewing \"with deep distress the conflict in Iraq,\" worrying that sectarian tensions would spill across Iraq's borders, and decrying a \"festering\" Palestinian dispute, violence in Lebanon, and rising tensions over Iran's nuclear program.  (Ref A).  9.  (C)  Comment:  In two important ways, Musharraf's moderate Muslim states initiative has already been a success.  It has brought together key foreign ministers, including those from Saudi Arabia and Egypt, on relatively short notice; and it has made Iran uncomfortable.  Musharraf's initiative creates an interesting, unplanned synergy with the UNSC resolution and the Iraq neighboring states initiative. The three actions together provide both incentives and negative consequences to encourage Iran to moderate its behavior.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1267", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/21/2007 1:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001280  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY: JUSTICES RESIGN, MUSHARRAF REASSURES, PARLIAMENTARIANS REQUISITION  REF: ISLAMABAD 1267 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Pakistan's press and elite continue to focus on the controversy over Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry's suspension. As of mid-afternoon March 20, the following occurred:  - There were no reports of large-scale demonstrations in any of Pakistan's cities on March 20.  - On March 20, Naseer Saeed Sheikh, one of several Deputy Attorney Generals, resigned.  - The government announced that the March 21 session of the Supreme Judicial Council would be postponed until April 3 -- after Justice Rana Bhagwandas takes the oath as acting Chief Justice. This will allow the government more time to let the situation settle down.  - On March 20, Inspector Khalid Mehmood was arrested in connection with his role in the police raid on Geo television. (Note: Mehmood was reportedly the officer in charge at the time of the raid. End Note.)  - So far, nine justices, including Lahore High Court justice Jawad S. Khawaja, have resigned their posts. Khawaja told reporters that his resignation was a response to police excesses during protests against the Government's handling of the reference against Justice Chaudhry. Others, including First Class Magistrate Rajesh Chandar Rajput (whose brother-in-law happens to be the son of soon-to-be Acting Chief Justice Rana Bhagwandas) said his resignation was in protest against the maltreatment and forced leave of Chief Justice Chaudhry.  - Late March 19, President Musharraf appeared for an interview on Geo television. Musharraf assured viewers that he would not declare a state of emergency and that general elections will be held on time. He also discussed his positions on press freedom (he supports it), the police attack on the Geo office (investigations are underway); and the right to protest (everyone has the right to protest, but \"political elements\" should not become involved).  - Opposition members in the National Assembly are filing a requisition to hold a special session of Parliament. Although the National Assembly is scheduled to hold its next session on March 26, opposition sources hypothesized that the government might delay the session because of the judicial controversy. (Note: A requisition, when appropriately filed, compels the Speaker to summon the National Assembly within 14 days of receipt. End Note.)  - Acting Chief Justice Javed Iqbal ordered Attorney General Makhdoom Ali Khan to appear before the Supreme Court to provide testimony about the police manhandling of Justice Chaudhry. (Note: On March 20, Deputy Attorney General Raja Irshad appeared instead. End Note.)  - The blame game is in full swing. Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, Constitutional Advisor Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, and Law Minister Wasi Zaffar have been singled out so far for supposedly recommending action against Justice Chaudhry in the first place.   ISLAMABAD 00001280  002 OF 002   - Pakistan's capital was buffeted with unseasonably heavy rains on March 19 and early March 20. Weather forecasts for March 21 -- the planned day for the nationwide wheeljam protest -- also predict a chance of rain, which may affect turnout. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1280|07ISLAMABAD637", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/21/2007 12:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001293  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: LAWYERS, POLITICAL PARTIES PROTEST CHIEF JUSTICE'S SUSPENSION  REF: ISLAMABAD 1280 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d )  1. (SBU) On March 21, lawyers and political party members took to the streets once again to protest the suspension of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry. Except for a report that police in Quetta injured several demonstrators, protests nationwide were peaceful.  Islamabad: A group of 300-400 protesters braved heavy morning rains to march from The Blue Area (Islamabad's business district) to the Supreme Court. The weather cleared by midday and approximately 2,500 to 3,000 eventually gathered in front of the Supreme Court. The protest, which was peaceful, dispersed by late afternoon. Protesters included lawyers as well as representatives from both secular political parties -- Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N), Pakistan People's Party (PPP), and Former cricketer Imran Khan's micro party Tehrik-e-Insaf -- and the religious political party coalition Mutahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA). PPP and MMA protesters exchanged public barbs at one another during the protests. The MMA criticized the PPP for distancing itself from the rest of the opposition, while the PPP fired back at the MMA for supporting President Musharraf in passing the 17th amendment to the constitution, which legitimized Musharraf's 1999 takeover.  Lahore: The various Punjab Bar associations called a protest on The Mall (the main street in Lahore's Central Business District). Approximately 1,000 marched toward The Mall to the Punjab High Court building. By midday, 2,000 - 3,000 lawyers had gathered to protest in front of the Punjab High Court. Police contacts report that everything was calm, although lawyers blocked traffic and shut down the city's central business district. Police were under strict instructions from the city and provincial governments not to confront the lawers and to allow them access to protest on The Mall, unlike in previous days. Religious party Jamiat-e-Islami (JI) officials \"greeted\" the lawyers along the march route, but did not mobilize their members for the protest. Crowds dispersed by mid-afternoon without incident.  Peshawar:  There were no visible demonstrations of significant size since March 19.  There have been small gatherings of several students or local residents, including a small group assembled outside Bala Hissar Fort on March 21, but they have not fomented wider protests.  In NWFP, the nationwide strike of courts will likely empty courtrooms on March 22, but post does not expect further demonstrations.  Karachi: Approximately 250 lawyers attended protest meetings and rallies at the city courts in Karachi. The Sindh High Court and Karachi Bar Association cancelled their plans to stage a rally/sit-in at the Chief Minister's residence, so street protests in Karachi were limited to scattered JI demonstrations at approximately 70 crossroads around Karachi.  Quetta: Lawyers in Quetta hoisted black flags at the Pakistan Bar Council headquarters, boycotted court proceedings, and protested in the streets. Turnout numbers were limited (media reports estimated 200), as lawyers in Quetta are divided on the issue of whether to support Justice Chaudhry. (Note: Some blame Chaudhry, who is from Balochistan, for brokering deals with the military and not taking notice of security operations or the killing of prominent tribal leader Nawab  ISLAMABAD 00001293  002 OF 002   Akbar Bugti in August 2006. End Note.) Police used teargas against the demonstrators, which reportedly injured two lawyers. Representatives from both PPP and MMA joined the lawyers in their demonstration.  2. (U) Also on March 21, the news media published the reference against Justice Chaudhry, dated March 9 (available online at http://www.dawn.com/2007/03/21/nat2.htm). The alleged misconduct, which the reference says Prime Minister Aziz received from several sources, includes the Chief Justice:  - Using his position to secure several government jobs for his son for which his son was not qualified. - Securing the use of official vehicles beyond his authorized entitlement of one 1600cc car. - Making unprecedented requests for police motorcade protection. - Demanding that senior bureaucrats meet him on arrival in provincial capitals. - Demanding the use of planes and helicopters for domestic travel. - Changing two verdicts after orally announcing them -- one variance allegedly involved an amount of 55 million rupees (approximately USD 900,000). - Accepting accomodation from a litigant before the Supreme Court  3. (C) Comment: In spite of early rain and the cancellation of the Supreme Judicial Council hearing (rescheduled for April 3), lawyers' associations and political parties still managed to generate a good turnout. The allegations against Justice Chaudhry -- the bulk of which refer to his attempts to secure a government job for his son -- are no surprise (see Islamabad 637). Many of the accusations involve behavior typical of Pakistani officials. Indeed, Justice Chaudhry's attorneys have told us that they will not deny the allegations, but instead point out that the justices on the Supreme Judicial Council do the same things. One of the day's good news stories is the lack of violence from either demonstrators or police. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/23/2007 9:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001329  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  FROM AMBASSADOR CROCKER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: WHAT THE CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY IS. . .AND IS NOT  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Two weeks in -- and occasionally breathless commentary in the international press aside -- observers increasingly believe that President Musharraf's government has not been seriously wounded by the Chief Justice controversy.  Barring the outbreak of widespread street violence leading to civilian deaths, we do not see Musharraf's situation changing in the near future.  Indeed, if anything, some good may eventually come of this episode.  2.  (C)  While things can change quickly in this country, we present here some important observations.  WHAT THE CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY IS NOT -- AS OF NOW  3.  (C)  THIS IS NOT AN IMMINENT THREAT TO MUSHARRAF'S RULE: He has weathered worse storms, including the public reaction to the Damadola attack; the Danish Cartoon protests; and two assassination attempts.  Both Damadola and the Danish cartoons resonated with the poor and working classes.  This controversy does not.  The vast majority of Pakistanis are not adequately literate to understand the intricacies of the Chief Justice proceedings.  Even senior PPP leaders remind us that their constituents do not see how this controversy affects the things that matter most to them:  food, shelter, and personal safety.  4.  (C)  THIS IS NOT THE EVENT THAT WILL UNITE THE OPPOSITION:  The PPP is maintaining a low profile and has been at pains to separate itself from the MMA at rallies. Not only does the PPP not want to strengthen the religious parties, it does not want street protests to become violent or spiral out of control, which might in turn bring about a military crack-down.  The PPP worries that widespread violence might lead to a postponement of Benazir Bhutto's return, which is still under negotiation.  5.  (C)  THIS IS NOT AN EVENT THAT HAS CAUSED IRREPARABLE, EXTREME HARM TO MUSHARRAF'S REPUTATION:  The President's quick apology to Geo Television, his agreeing to be interviewed on a Geo program on March 20, and his arranging for the highly-respected Justice Bagwandas to become the new Acting Supreme Court Judge, rather than the initially appointed (and less admired) Javed Iqbal, have helped to curb domestic criticism and prevent extreme political damage. That said, some PPP leaders believe that Musharraf is adequately worried about his reputation that he may seek to renew negotiations that would allow a cooperative PPP/PML-Q arrangement either before or after the next election.  While the PPP initially told us that negotiations were \"off\" because of the Chief Justice controversy, they now tell us they are willing to talk again.   WHAT THIS CONTROVERSY IS -- AS OF NOW  6.  (C)  THE EPISODE IS AN INDICTMENT OF THE PAKISTANI POLICE:  The PML-Q, PPP, and MMA agree on one thing about the next election:  law and order will be a major issue for voters.  The refusal of the police who stormed the Geo television station to take orders from Minister of Information Durrani -- an exchange that was broadcast live -- resonates with poor Pakistanis, who bear the brunt of police corruption.  The government's difficulty assigning blame to senior officials also resonates with Pakistanis.  Ever since a reorganization scheme removed district officials and provincial home secretaries from the police chain of command,  ISLAMABAD 00001329  002 OF 002   authority over the police has resided only with the Minister of Interior in Islamabad.  Observers have noted a marked rise in police misconduct as accountability from civilian authorities has become more distant.  PML leaders tell us they believe the police misconduct issue could hurt them in the election if the government does not act to rein in misbehavior.  7.  (C)  THE DEMONSTRATIONS INDICATE THAT THE POLICE NEED MORE TRAINING:  Lack of riot control skills was painfully clear as police hurled at protesters bricks that had first been thrown at the police.  Additionally, the destruction at Geo television and at lawyers' offices around the country indicates the general lack of professional training and competence in many parts of the police forces.  (Note:  In this vein, Post identified riot control training as an important priority for 2007 Anti-Terrorism Assistance programming.  End Note.)  8.  (C)  EXTERNAL COMMENTARY IS NOT WELCOME:  Both Pakistani Government and opposition contacts have palpably resented public comments by EU officials criticizing the handling of the Chief Justice Affair.  The resentment on both sides has little to do with the merits of the complaints.  Instead, as our contacts remind us, Pakistanis, including elected officials, have been resolving the problem on their own.  The civil society prefers the controversy to focus on its own complaints and accomplishments.  They also note that they are in the best position to produce statements that will prevent the medicine (the protests) from becoming worse than the disease.  9.  (C)  Comment:  Musharraf's initial failure to seek adequate political advice before moving against the Chief Justice could have damaged his and the PML's electoral prospects.  Rapid distancing of the PML from the controversy, coupled with Musharraf's common sense damage control seems to have prevented irreparable harm.  The reputation of the police, though, has clearly suffered a significant (and deserved) blow.  Indeed, this episode is an important reminder of the fundamental importance of our various law enforcement training programs -- and the need to consider expanding those programs to include riot control training.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1094|07ISLAMABAD298|07ISLAMABAD608", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/24/2007 6:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001331  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PREF, PK, AF SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER ON STATUS OF PAK-AFGHAN JIRGA PLANNING  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1094      B. ISLAMABAD 608      C. ISLAMABAD 298  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: In meetings with Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher on March 15 and with Ambassador on March 19, Interior Minister and Chairman of Pakistan's Jirga Commission Afthab Ahmed Khan Sherpao reviewed the status of the Pak-Afghan jirga process. He described a collegial, cooperative mood at the meetings with the Afghan Jirga Commission March 12-13 in Islamabad, but said that much work remained to prepare for the jirga. The next Jirga Commission meeting will take place April 9-11 in Kabul.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ Good Vibrations at March 12-13 Jirga Commission Bilateral --------------------------------------------- ------------  2. (C) Interor Minister Sherpao told Assistant Secretary Boucher that he had a \"good interaction\" with the Afghan delegation that visited Islamabad for the Jirga Commission meeting March 12-13, emphasizing the \"warm\" atmospherics of the meeting.  He has known Syed Pir Ahmed Gilani, the Chairman of Afghanistan's Jirga Commission, for a long time and was pleased with this \"first people-to-people interaction\" on the jirga.  Sherpao expressed his satisfaction that the Afghan side agreed on the importance of lowering the heat in the Pak-Afghan relationship, building trust and goodwill, and dealing with differences through the jirga process rather than in the press.  Sherpao said the commissions also agreed that the result of the jirgas should be the elimination of terrorism, especially Al Qaeda elements, while addressing the root causes of the problem. Sherpao added that the Afghan side acknowledged Pakistan's efforts in the border areas.  (Note: Sherpao lamented that President Karzai is influenced by others with different opinions. End note.)  Ambassador stressed the current momentum shift that makes this the right time to move forward with jirgas: we are seeing locals' impatience with foreigners in their areas; warmer Pak-Afghan relations; and the arrest campaign against the Taliban.  3. (C) Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri touched on the Jirga Commission meeting during the Ambassador's March 13 farewell call.  Kasuri hoped the commissions would, in addition to planning the jirgas, enhance grassroots links between the two nations.  \"People-to-people exchanges have made a tremendous difference in our relationship with India,\" he said, \"and they should do so for Afghanistan as well.\"  --------------------------------------- Sherpao's Thoughts on Jirga Composition ---------------------------------------  4. (C) Sherpao told Boucher that the March 12-13 discussions focused on the composition of the jirga and its terms of reference.  When Boucher pressed for specifics and deadlines the two sides agreed to, Sherpao equivocated.  He said Pakistan raised no objection to a large jirga with national-level representation, although Pakistan had no experience with that type of jirga.  \"If they want 300 from their side, we can have 300, too,\" he said.  When Boucher asked if Pakistan would only include traditional tribal leaders as representatives, Sherpao said they would invite \"anyone who can help us.\"  Sherpao later told Ambassador he  ISLAMABAD 00001331  002 OF 002   thinks that the participation of prominent political party members and elected officials will bring credibility to the jirga process and will be a blow to those who want to create problems.  5. (C) Sherpao was adamant that outside observers should not attend the grand jirga, explaining that \"for the optics\" this should be seen as the \"will of the people of both sides\" and \"outside presence could dilute the jirga's effectiveness.\"  6. (C) Sherpao also said that Pakistan is not opposed to using smaller joint Pak-Afghan jirgas composed of prominent people with local influence to help quell insurgency in volatile border areas.  Sherpao sees this strategy succeeding if all sides follow up the jirgas with development work. Boucher assured Sherpao that the U.S. government is well-positioned to support these efforts.  -------------------------------- Refugees Remain a Sticking Point --------------------------------  7. (C) Sherpao reiterated to Boucher that the Pakistani government will move to close four Afghan refugee camps this spring.  He cautioned that the Afghan Jirga Commission had asked Pakistan to leave Jalozai camp alone, fearing that those refugees will go to Kabul, where there are not enough jobs to handle the influx.  ------------------------------- Next Steps on Jirga Preparation -------------------------------  8. (C) The next bilateral Jirga Commission meeting will take place April 8-11 in Kabul.  Sherpao told Boucher that Pakistan had committed to bringing a list of proposed jirga participants to Kabul, but he later told Ambassador that the two sides would draw up nomination lists after the April meeting.  9. (C) Sherpao could not give Boucher a definite timeline for when the jirga would take place.  He said the jirga commissions agreed \"they should hurry it up\", but his tone was non-committal.  In a separate meeting, Ambassador urged Sherpao to work expeditiously in order to maximize the jirga's impact against the Taliban, acknowledging that the process is complex and time-consuming.  10. (U) SCA Senior Advisor Caitlin Hayden cleared this cable.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1279", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/26/2007 6:47", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001334  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARAFF TO ATTEND ARAB SUMMIT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1279       B. ISLAMABAD 895  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  Most of Pakistan's March 25 papers highlighted Saudi King Abdullah's invitation to President Musharraf to attend the March 28-29 Arab League Summit in Riyadh.  According to the press, this is the first time the Arab League has invited a Pakistani leader to attend a League summit as a participant.  2.  (C)  During Ambassador's March 24 farewell call on Musharraf, the President said he had called Saudi King Abdullah to follow up on the Saudi promise to host a summit of seven moderate Muslim states (reftels).  The King responded by inviting Musharraf to attend and speak at the March 28-29 Arab Summit and asked Musharraf to extend invitations on his behalf to the other three non-Arab states involved in the initiative (Turkey, Indonesia, and Malaysia).  Musharraf said he would use the opportunity to stress the themes of the threat within Islam from extremism and sectarianism and the need for Islamic moderates to take a stand.  Abdullah also told Musharraf they would consult on a date for a summit of the seven. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/26/2007 12:01", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001354  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF ON CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY, FATA, AND JIRGAS   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  Ambassador paid his farewell call on President Musharraf on March 24.  The meeting was front-page news in most Pakistani papers, with many articles emphasizing Musharraf's promise to \"fight the war on terror to the end.\" The press coverage highlighted the strength of the U.S.-Pakistan strategic relationship; the significant number of Pakistanis studying under the Fulbright program; and Musharraf's promise to address the \"roots of terrorism\" -- an allusion to his Federally Administered Tribal Areas development strategy.  GOVERNMENT INSTIGATING ATTACKS AGAINST FOREIGNERS IN FATA  2.  (C)  Musharraf said he remains fully committed to the war on terror.  Two brigades have completed their deployment to North and South Waziristan as part of the process of asserting government control.  The government has successfully instigated tribesmen against the Uzbeks in South Waziristan, with over 200 killed; Musharraf wants to encourage similar action in North Waziristan and elsewhere. While the government will need to proceed carefully to insure that the population is with the government and against the foreigners, Musharraf stressed that there will be no hesitation in going after al-Qaida targets.  FATA and JIRGAS  3.  (C)  Musharraf expressed appreciation for the Administration's commitment to provide USD 150 million in FY 07 to begin funding Tribal Area development.  Musharraf understood that success with this tranche of money was key to securing additional funding in the out years.  He said Pakistan was working to implement a fully coordinated approach between Islamabad institutions (federal ministries, the military, the parliament) and provincial institutions (the NWFP Governor, the FATA Secretariat, and the FATA Development Authority.)  4.    (C)  Musharraf agreed that the Pak-Afghan jirga process had great potential to improve cross-border cooperation, to improve security conditions,  and to reduce tension between the two countries.  The Ambassador urged that the two sides move quickly to conclude arrangements for a jirga and asked Musharraf to make this a priority.  Musharraf said he would.  CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY  5.  (C)  Musharraf confided that the Government of Pakistan had made a mess of handling corruption accusations against the Chief Justice.  He took personal responsibility for not having developed a \"what if\" plan -- referring, among other things, to the lack of consideration of what would happen if the Chief Justice refused to resign after learning of the reference against him.  Musharraf emphasized that he believed the Chief Justice was corrupt and had damaged judicial institutions.  Something had to be done, he said, though he admitted his government had handled the problem badly.  6.  (C)  Musharraf was personally directing damage control. He had provided very specific orders to the police and other agencies, telling them to  leave the media alone  and not to engage protesters head on.  Musharraf added that the two weeks of incidents had proven that the police needed greater training, discipline, and effective control.  He committed himself to working on those shortcomings.  7.   (C)  Musharraf said he had personally ordered all relevant institutions to allow the Chief Justice unfettered movement around Pakistan.  At the same time, he was working  ISLAMABAD 00001354  002 OF 002   with business leaders to emphasize that allowing the controversy to continue at a fevered pitch would not be in Pakistan's interests.  The President hoped that the PPP also would continue its relatively restrained public posture. (Note:  The Friday Times -- the favored publication of Pakistan's intelligentsia -- this week highlighted the argument that street demonstrations in the Muslim world historically bring Islamist regimes to power, while free elections support moderate democrats.  End Note.)  PERSONNEL CHANGES  8.  (C)  While describing next steps in the controversy, Musharraf concurred with Ambassador that Law Minister Wasi Muhammad Zafar, whose profane rant on VOA had offended many Pakistanis, had exacerbated the Chief Justice controversy. Although he was a \"loyalist,\" Zafar was a liability and Musharraf said he was going to fire him.  Musharraf also would fire the head of the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Agency, whose heavy handed interventions throughout the controversy -- including shutting down Geo television for 20 minutes and demanding that stations remove rolling news tickers about the controversy -- had been both unhelpful and wrong.  9.  (C)  Musharraf offered that, while Information Minister Durrani had been overwhelmed by the crushing international media attention since the controversy began, the President had no plans to remove him. Instead, Pakistan would strengthen the ministry by hiring a professional public relations consultant.  10.  (C)  A discussion of the upcoming Arab League Summit is being reported Septel. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/26/2007 13:02", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001362  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE SUSPENSION PROTESTS SET ON \"SIMMER\" - PPP HEAVYWEIGHTS QUIETLY SEEK DIALOGUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 1329 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) The Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy called for further demonstrations on March 26 to protest Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry's suspension. Turnout was highest in Lahore (septel), where approximately 1,200 Pakistan People's Party,  Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz, and Jamaat-e-Islami representatives protested peacefully. (Note: The Mutahida Majlis-e-Amam coalition of religious parties, of which Jamaat-e-Islami is a member, declared its support for the Alliance's call for protests. End Note.) Islamabad turnout was low: approximately 50 protesters staged a three-hour sit-in at Melody Market. Numbers in Karachi and Peshawar were similarly low.  2. (C) As the Alliance's senior coalition partner, the Pakistan People's Party is participating in the protests, but their hearts do not appear to be in it, keeping the numbers of protesters relatively low. Part of the reason may be the arrest of many party workers. The media reported that Punjab police arrested over 200 opposition leaders and workers over the weekend. Others, one Pakistan People's Party official said, are \"in hiding\" so as not to be arrested.  3. (S-NF) More fundamentally, People's Party leadership is still taking a wait-and-see approach to the Chief Justice controversy. Pakistan People's Party ex-Senator Abdullah Riar brought together National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz and Justice Chaudhry's lead counsel (and People's Party member) Aitzaz Ahsan for an exploratory meeting over the weekend. The result of the meeting, Riar said, was a basic exchange of positions. On March 26, Riar told PolOff that Aitzaz's position was a non-starter, since he was asking the government to withdraw the reference against Justice Chaudhry. The parties left the meeting willing to talk again, however.  4. (S-NF) Comment: The Pakistan People's Party has two reasons to distance itself from the Chief Justice controversy. The publicly discussed reason is that they do not want to hand a victory to the religious parties. More privately, however, they may see the controversy as a way to advance their political agenda. Through its quiet diplomacy and restraining its street power, the Pakistan People's Party may be positioning itself for a potential electoral deal with the Musharraf government. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE36980", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/27/2007 12:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001377  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  GENEVA/CD DEL AND ISN/WILLIAM MALZAHN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/27/2017 TAGS: PK, IN, KNNP, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN WANTS EFFECTIVE VERIFICATION IN P-6 PROPOSAL  REF: STATE 36980  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) On March 26, Deputy Chief of Mission delivered points in reftel to Ministry of Foreign Affairs Additional Secretary for UN Affairs Tariq Osman Hyder.  Hyder responded that Pakistan was firm in its opposition to a negotiating mandate for the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty that did not include a reference to \"international and effective verification.\" Hyder explained that Pakistan supported three of the proposal's suggestions:  ongoing discussion of nuclear disarmament, negative security assurances, and prevention of an outer space arms race.  He further noted that Pakistan was not opposed, in principle, to keeping negotiation of the Fissile Treaty on the Conference's agenda for part II of 2007, but Pakistan would not approve of the P-6 proposal as written because the negotiating mandate for the Treaty was too narrow.  \"It is a matter of resources and national security,\" Hyder said; \"Our country does not have the resources to provide for effective verification on its own, and effective verification is what matters most in this region.\"  Hyder said Pakistan remained committed to the \"Shannon Mandate\" of 1995, which contains the full technical phrase that Pakistan wanted included in the Conference's proposed negotiating mandate for the Treaty.  Pakistan would like the treaty to be \"non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable.\"    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/29/2007 11:20", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001417  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/29/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, IN, AF SUBJECT: UPCOMING BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  (S)  Jawad Ali, Assistant Director of the the Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs Disarmament Cell, informed post March 29 that Pakistan would test a surface-to-surface ballistic missile between March 30 and April 3, 2007.  The anticipated trajectory is over Pakistani territory only.  Per previous agreements, Pakistan has informed the governments of India, Afghanistan, and China.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE1569", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/2/2007 12:26", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 001451  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  EMBASSY AMMAN FOR JOSEPH C. IRVINE ISN/ECC FOR CASSADY CRAFT AND VENNIE PIKOULAS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, KNNP SUBJECT: PAKISTANI PARTICIPANTS IN AMMAN PROLIFERATION AWARENESS TRAINING  REF: A. STATE 1569      B. WEST-CRAFT EMAILS  1.  The Government of Pakistan warmly welcomes the invitation of the United States to participate in the Proliferation Awareness Training taking place in Amman, Jordan, April 16-18.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has selected the following 9 individuals to participate:  1.  Jawad Ali, Assistant Director (Disarmament), Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2.  Massood ul Hasan Qureshi, Deputy Chief of Exports, Ministry of Commerce 3.  Abdul Shakoor, Scientific Officer, Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Agency 4.  Arshad Rashid Bhatti, Deputy Chief, Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission 5.  Abdul Hafeez Chaudhry, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Industries, Production and Special Initiatives 6.  Capt Raashid Bashir Mazari, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Interior 7.  Cdr. Syed Ahmed Ovais Hyder Zaidi, Maritime Security Agency 8.  Khalid Mehmood, Collector (Exports), Central Board of Revenue 9.  Col Muhammad Khurshid Khan, Strategic Planning Directorate  2.  Embassy Islamabad point of contact is PolOff Tom West (westtw@state.gov and 051-208-2294).  Post would appreciate receiving fund cite information from Washington to purchase plane tickets soonest.  Thank you.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/2/2007 14:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001456  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  The Supreme Judicial Council deciding the fate of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry is scheduled to meet again on April 3.  Islamabad police are planning for a possibly large demonstration that day, but public interest in the Chief Justice controversy has declined markedly during the last week.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  During an April 1 meeting with Codel Tierney, Aitzaz Ahsan, lead counsel for \"non-functioning\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, updated the Codel on proceedings against his client.  At the April 3 meeting of the Supreme Judicial Council, Aitzaz will present three petitions asking the Council to:  1.)  End the in-camera nature of the proceedings;  2.)  Dismiss at least three judges from the Council because of known conflicts of interest and/or personal enmity of the Chief Justice; and 3.) Dismiss the Council altogether because there is no constitutional mandate for a Supreme Judicial Council not headed by the Chief Justice.  (Note:  According to Aitzaz, under the constitution, only the Chief Justice can chair a Supreme Judicial Council.  No constitutional alternative exists if the Chief Justice himself is the subject of the Council's inquiry.  Aitzaz claims the proper way to deal with a Chief Justice accused of malfeasance or misconduct is an impeachment trial by the entire Supreme Court, not a Supreme Judicial Council.  Aitzaz plans to cite American practice as a precedent:  according to Aitzaz, the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court is never able to recuse himself from a case.  When he is aware of a conflict of interest, he does not participate in the debate or vote, but he still acts as Chief Justice, leading the Court on the matter.  End Note.)  3.  On April 2, Attorney Zafarullah Khan filed a petition with the Supreme Court arguing that the proceedings against the Chief Justice were unconstitutional for a variety of procedural and constitutional reasons.  The Court agreed to hear his petition -- along with two other similar petitions -- on April 11, but refused to suspend the Supreme Judicial Council until then.  The Court also agreed to hear another petition claiming that Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas cannot serve as Acting Chief Justice because he is a Hindu.  The court will hear that petition on April 4. (Note:  While it is true that the Chief Justice normally also serves as Chief of the Shariat Court, legal experts tell us there is no constitutional requirement for the Chief Justice to be a Muslim -- the Chief Justice can simply appoint a surrogate to head the Shariat Court. End Note.)  4.  Aitzaz reports that the demonstration planned for the street in front of the Supreme Court on April 3 will draw \"a large crowd\", despite this week's major PPP rally in Larkana, the ancestral home of the Bhuttos. The PPP expects about half a million of the faithful to attend the Sindh rally, which memorializes the hanging of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.  5.  (C)  Comment:  While still an occasional topic of conversation among the elites, general interest in the Chief Justice controversy has dramatically declined over the last week. The one event that could reignite public passion would be if related protest marches became violent.  We continue to encourage both the government and demonstrators to show restraint and to eschew violence.  End Comment   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1456", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/3/2007 14:35", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 001466  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE: MINOR PROTESTS THROUGHOUT PAKISTAN  REF: ISLAMABAD 01456  (SBU) The Supreme Judicial Council deciding the fate of \"non-functional\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry met on April 3 and then adjourned until April 13.  Embassy locally engaged staff reported that up to 1,500 protesters, mostly lawyers and political party activists, turned out on Islamabad's Constitution Avenue to protest the government's action against the Chief Justice. In Lahore, close to 1,500 Jama'at Islami party members marched peacefully down the mall to the Punjab High Court, where party leaders Liaqat Baloch and Hafiz Salman Butt gave speeches.  Protests were smaller in Peshawar (150-200 people), Karachi (400-500 people), and Quetta (200-300 people). Today's protests did not dominate the morning's papers or the day's TV coverage in Pakistan; news of tribes declaring \"jihad\" against Uzbeks in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Prime Minister Aziz' participation in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Summit in Delhi garnered equal or more attention. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1466", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/4/2007 15:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001490  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/04/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE:  THE COURTROOM AND THE STREET  REF: ISLAMABAD 01466  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) The bulk of the April 3 session of the Supreme Judicial Council proceedings against non-functioning Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry involved a debate over the in camera nature of the Council.  (The Chief Justice wants public proceedings; the government wants them closed.) In a conversation with Embassy staff on April 4, one of Chaudhry's lawyers predicted that Chaudhry and the government might eventually reach a compromise that would make some sessions of the Council public, others in camera.  As reported reftel, the Council adjourned until April 13.  2.  (C) Breathless reporting in some Western news outlets notwithstanding, the atmosphere outside the courtroom April 3 was generally peaceful and, according to several Embassy observers, \"fair-like.\"  Many protesters brought lunches and posed in groups for the cameras.  A few hundred Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz and People's Party Parliamentarian members shook hands before shouting at one another, while the better-represented religious parties (about 1,500 in number) made good use of a platform and megaphones.  (Note:  The Jama'at Islami party dominated protests in all major cities yesterday, reflecting their relative advantage in organizational discipline over the mainstream parties.  End Note.)  A notable exception to the calm, however, occurred when protesting lawyers roughed up two attorneys for the government, Khalid Ranjha and Arif Chaudhry, as they left the Supreme Court.  Ranjha, in fact, withdrew from the government's legal team after the incident, leaving the government searching for equally prominent representation. (Note:  The Attorney General, himself a fine lawyer, is technically the lead attorney for the government but is not handling the day-to-day legal work.  End Note.)  3.  (C) Comment:  Barring an unforeseen outbreak in serious street violence, the peak in this controversy seems to have passed.  Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas' steady and credible stewardship of the Supreme Judicial Council, coupled with this complicated legal issue's lack of resonance among the general public, has pushed this story away from the front of the news cycle in Pakistan.  Indeed, Prime Minister Aziz' 5-point roadmap for the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation received as much press coverage on April 4 as the Chief Justice issue.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD650", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/12/2007 2:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000674  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2017 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: G.G. ON JIRGAS  REF: ISLAMABAD 650  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Minister of Culture Dr. Ghazi Gulab (G.G.) Jamal, a key member of Pakistan's jirga commission, told us February 7 that, when representatives of the two commissions meet later in February, key topics for discussion will include: to whom to issue jirga invitations; the scope of the jirga,s authority; and the jirga,s enforcement powers. Jamal stated -- as have other Embassy contacts -- that if Punjabis or Sindhis participate in the meeting, Pashtuns will strongly oppose calling the event a \"jirga.\"  He also warned that no matter how well planned, at least some  participants will inevitably bring up the Durand Line or Pashtun independence.  He postulated that such \"Pandora,s Box\" issues created greater angst in Pakistan than in Afghanistan. End summary.  2. (C) In a February 7 conversation with poloffs, Minister of Culture (and Jirga Commission member) Dr. G.G. Jamal reviewed the challenges facing those charged with moving ahead on the September 27 White House Iftar proposal for a Pak-Afghan jirga. While the minister displayed a sophisticated understanding of both sides, need to be seen taking steps toward peace and stability -- and acknowledged the potential benefits of a parallel or cross-border meeting in building confidence and hope -- Jamal, like other Embassy contacts, stressed that the decision to hold a \"jirga\" had been made without understanding Pakistani Pashtun jirga traditions. Pakistani Pashtun jirgas he explained, convene to decide specific questions, such as a person,s guilt or innocence, how much compensation a family or tribe owed a counterpart, or how to resolve a tribal conflict.  It was unclear to Jamal how the parallel jirgas, or even a cross-border jirga, would define a specific question to be resolved.  The other critical component of Pashtun jirgas, he said, was the unquestioned authority of the jirga to issue a \"waqt\", an enforceable verdict that all participants were obligated to respect.  3.  (C)  Jamal said the Pakistani Commission was not contrarian, but rather wanted to \"listen to the Afghan concept and plans\" before agreeing to move forward.  Jamal said that Pakistan's Jirga Commission Chair, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao, had already extended an invitation to Afghan Commission Chair Pir Gailani for a meeting later in February to discuss the Pakistani and Afghan ideas and reservations as a \"first step\"  (Reftel).  He said the date was not yet established.  The \"Pandora,s Box\" Problem ---------------------------  4.  (C)  Jamal worried that jirga participants might bring up issues related to the Durand Line or even Pashtun independence.  Such a risk made careful analysis of the invitation list crucial, especially for Pakistan, to whom discussion of the Durand Line was anathema.  A friend of Jamal,s from the Tribal Areas, who was present at the meeting, was even more blunt:  \"What if the jirga decides that both governments must leave the area?\" he asked.  \"What will happen?\"  Jamal replied that, while he thought the debate could be controlled, he was sure that someone would bring up the Durand Line at the jirga and that, under Pashtun tradition, the jirga would be obliged to discuss the matter.  Let's Not Call This A Jirga ---------------------------  5.  (C)  Poloff asked Jamal if Pakistani Pashtuns would agree to calling an event a jirga if Punjabis and Sindhis were  ISLAMABAD 00000674  002 OF 002   present.  He bluntly answer \"no.\"  (Comment:  -- Every Pashtun we have asked gives the same answer.  End Comment.) Jamal said another name probably could be developed, although he could not think of an appropriate Pashtun word or institution.  That said, he also expressed some concern that Pashtuns would find it inappropriate for Punjabis or Sindhis to be participating in a jirga-like meeting to discuss events in Pashtun areas.  6. (C) Comment.  We do not believe Pakistan is purposefully blocking the Pak-Aghan Jirga.  As Jamal notes, serious issues must be discussed and evaluated.  If the jirgas occur without adequate planning or without anticipating potential negative outcomes, they would be counterproductive.  Indeed, if the issue of Pashtun independence becomes a primary point of debate, Pakistan and Afghanistan could find themselves in a tougher predicament than the unenviable position they are already in. End comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE196000", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/12/2007 12:45", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 000695  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PARM, ETTC, IR SUBJECT: MFA RESPONDS REGARDING ALLEGED PAKISTANI PROCUREMENT OF NBC SUITS  REF: A. STATE 196000       B. ISLAMABAD 22418  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires , a.i., Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (S)  On February 2, MFA (Disarmament Cell) Director Mohammad Kamran Akhtar advised PolCouns of MFA actions following post's December 11, 2006 demarche regarding information that a Pakistani firm, Westbridge Smc-Pvt. Limited,  may have purchased nuclear, biological and chemical (NBC) suits from Milad Industrial Factories in Iran (Ref A and B).  The MFA contacted the Westbridge's managing director, who indicated that his firm has not/not concluded any transactions with Milad Industrial Factories.  Westbridge had contacted Milad to look into a purchase of CBM suits, but no deal went through.  The MFA advised Westbridge's management that, although Milad is not included on the UNSCR 1737 list, ILSA sanctions could be triggered by a transaction with the company.  The Westbridge manager, who had been unaware of the ILSA regime, said his firm did not need the problems that attend business transactions with Iranian companies; he later forwarded to the MFA a copy of a letter to Milad stating that Westbridge did not intend to do business with any Iranian firms.  2.  (S)   Akhtar told PolCouns that acquiring NBC suits are not per se prohibited items, noting that Pakistan has declared its protective program to the OPCW.  That said, Akhtar listed several steps that the MFA has initiated, including:  -- a notice in the Pakistan Gazette, which has been forwarded to all relevant government entities (Customs, Commerce) and private organizations (Chamber of Commerce and Industry), regarding sanctions against Iran;  -- A message to the Pakistan Securities and Exchange Commission to advise three trading companies engaged in business with Iran to terminate such commercial relations;  --  Instruction to the Pakistan Embassy in Tehran regarding processing visa applications by individuals subject to travel restrictions; and  -- Plans to submit an updated compliance report to the UNSCR.  3. (S)  Comment:  Akhtar noted that this case was useful for the MFA, as it helped to identify private trading companies that might seek commercial contracts with Iranian firms -- a sector of the business community that the MFA had not previously targeted in its outreach on export control and UN sanctions regimes.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/14/2007 2:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000709  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2017 TAGS: PREL, PREF, PK, AF SUBJECT: REFUGEE TRIPARTITE MEETING ANNOUNCES CLOSURES, INCENTIVES, ASKS FOR HELP  REF: A. DOHERTY/AMLIN/AGUILAR E-MAIL (WITH UNHCR          REFERENCE DOCUMENTS) OF 12 FEB 07      B. DOHERTY/HOOVER/AMLIN E-MAIL OF 8 FEB 07      C. ISLAMABAD 629      D. ISLAMABAD 526  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (U) On February 7, participants of the 12th Refugee Tripartite Commission announced their decision to close four Afghan refugee camps in Pakistan in 2007. Scheduled in two phases, the closures will affect over 240,000 of Pakistan's estimated 2.4 million Afghan refugees. The Government of Pakistan pledged to contribute USD 5 million to increase repatriation packages from USD 60 to USD 100 per person. Pakistani, Afghan, and UNHCR Tripartite representatives appealed to the international community to provide additional financial support to encourage repatriations.  End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Phased Closures Scheduled, Added Benefits Promised --------------------------------------------- -----  2. (U) On February 7, the Refugee Tripartite Commission confirmed publicly what Pakistani government officials had told us privately: in 2007, the Government of Pakistan will close four Afghan refugee camps in two phases. In total, the closures will affect approximately 10 percent of Pakistan's refugee population. The first phase (closure of Katchagari camp and Jungle Pir Alozai camp) will affect approximately 90,000 refugees and begin on April 15. The second phase (closure of Jalozai camp and Girdi Jungle camp) will affect approximately 152,000 refugees and begin on June 15. UNHCR and the Government of Pakistan plan to relocate those not wishing to repatriate to other camps in Pakistan.  3. (U) To encourage increased repatriations, Pakistan pledged its intent to contribute USD 5 million to increase repatriation packages from USD 60 to USD 100. Also, the Commission agreed to a six-week grace period for refugees without Proof of Registration cards who still would like assistance in returning to Afghanistan. (Note: UNHCR estimates that 2.2 of the 2.4 million refugees will be registered by the end of the registration period on February 15. End Note.)  ------------------------------------------ Commission Asks Donors For More Assistance ------------------------------------------  4. (U) After the Commission meeting, UNHCR invited the diplomatic community in Islamabad for a summary of the Commission's recommendations and a question/answer period. All Commission representatives appealed to the donor community to find additional funding to encourage returns, emphasizing that increased repatriation packages are only part of the solution. UNHCR handed out statistics from its March 2005 census, which revealed that 64 percent of Afghan refugees still living in camps stated that \"lack of shelter\" is the most important reason why they do not intend to return to Afghanistan. \"Lack of a livelihood\" in Afghanistan (18.2 percent) and \"lack of security\" (17.8 percent) were the second and third most important reasons.  5. (U) The Afghan representative announced his government's intention to increase the number of its proposed development townships from 50 - 100 and he appealed to the international community to help build vocational centers, schools, hospitals, transport networks and shelters.  ISLAMABAD 00000709  002 OF 002    ----------------------------------------- Importants First Steps Taken: More Needed -----------------------------------------  6. (C) Comment: The Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan took an important first step together in their agreement for camp closures and their appeal to the international community for help in encouraging Afghan refugees to go home. With the announcements out of the way, the hard work of logistical planning for the movement of 241,000 people affected by the closures needs to begin. The broad concept, provided in ref A, is a start, but if the process is poorly managed it could create even more security concerns -- from disgruntled refugees and extremists alike. Pakistani officials at multiple levels have privately told poloffs that Afghan refugees will not be given the option to relocate within Pakistan. These statements may be more reflective of hard-line talking points intended to persuade the international community of Islamabad's resolve than actual Government of Pakistan policy, but neither interpretation bodes well for a genuine planning process.  7. (C) Most Afghan refugees living in Pakistan have done so for most of their lives -- the vast majority of the remaining refugee population originally arrived before 1985. Many will no doubt remain, especially since many know no other home and those living in or near urban areas (like the 54,000 refugees who live in Katchagari) have better access to job opportunities in Pakistan than they would in their remote agricultural districts in Afghanistan. Post has heard that refugees anticipating camp closures are already starting to buy land some distance away from the camps expecting to relocate within Pakistan -- not repatriate to Afghanistan.  8. (C) To convince the Afghan refugees to return home, the international community will need to demonstrate that security, shelter, and a livelihood are waiting for them on the other side of the border. With an expected Taliban spring offensive looming and no repatriation-focused assistance commitments yet in sight, it will be a difficult sell for the spring. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/14/2007 6:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000729  SIPDIS  SIPDIS TERREP  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2010 TAGS: ACOA SUBJECT: TEST MESSAGE  Classified By: Classified by Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (a) and (c)  1.  Test message from IPC Islamabad.  How are things going? Did I get the classify by reasons wrong?   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/14/2007 11:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000744  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2010 TAGS: ACOA SUBJECT: TEST MESSAGE NO. 2  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (a) and (c)  1.  Second test message with SIPDIS caption.       BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD22152|06STATE17780|07STATE17156|07USNATO56", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/17/2007 5:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000783  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/14/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PNAT, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN TRANSIT AGREEMENT AND SOFA UPDATE  REF: A. STATE 17156      B. USNATO 56      C. 06 STATE 17780      D. EMBASSY ISLAMABAD-RPM FAX 02/09/07      E. 06 ISLAMABAD 22152  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde per 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU)  The Office of Defense Representative-Pakistan has checked its files and enquired with its contacts and finds no record of bilateral transit/personnel agreements other than the arrangements described in Ref D.  Recipients who would like to receive scanned versions of post's various transit understandings (10 pages of documents) should send an unclassified e-mail to sheacx@state.gov and request the  SIPDIS information.  2.  (C)  On February 14, post asked the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for an update on the Government of Pakistan's evaluation of the draft SOFA agreement presented to the Government in mid-November (Ref. E).  The MFA promised an early reply. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD68", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/20/2007 13:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000828  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 TAGS: PTER, PK SUBJECT: SUICIDE BOMBER DETONATES IN QUETTA COURTROOM: 16 KILLED, 40 WOUNDED  REF: ISLAMABAD 68  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (SBU) On February 17 at approximately 1100, a suicide bomber wearing explosives around his chest entered a courtroom in the Quetta District Court complex and detonated himself, killing 16 people and wounding 40. Among those killed was senior civil judge Abdul Wahid Durrani.  2. (U) The bomber has not yet been identified, but eyewitnesses told reporters that the bomber appeared to be young -- age 20 or so -- and bearded. On February 18, Balochistan Inspector General Tariq Khosa told reporters that police teams have rounded up 36 suspects, at least 22 of whom were Afghan refugees living in and around Quetta.  3. (C) A Quetta-based media contact told poloff that by February 19 the number of arrestees had gone up to 80. In addition to the Afghans, he said, police rounded up \"the usual suspects\" known to be active in banned sectarian extremist organizations, like Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and Sipah-e-Sahiba, hoping to get some clue as to who was responsible. Although locals suspect that the Baloch Liberation Army may be responsible, he said, the bombing has the police, media, and judiciary stumped because there was no clear motive and no clear target (other than the notoriously corrupt judiciary, which may or may not have been the purpose of the bombing). The contact added that people in Quetta are now worried about what may be a dangerous new trend, as the bombing was not clearly attributable to those usually responsible for terrorist violence in Quetta: sectarian organizations and Baloch nationalists.  4. (C) Comment: No matter who was responsible for Saturday's bombing, it is one more signal of the difficult security environment in Balochistan. Inspector General Khosa is new on the job, and Interior Minister Sherpao told the Embassy that Khosa's appointment is \"crucial to improving the law and order situation in Balochistan\" (ref A). Before reporting for duty, Khosa himself told the Charge that he is concerned about the enormity of the task at hand (protect). Now that he is in place, Khosa will have to deal with Baloch nationalists, sectarian extremists, and Taliban insurgents who also may be hiding among the Afghan refugee population. Khosa has his work cut out for him, and finding the culprits responsible for Saturday's bombing will be his first real test. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE17010", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/21/2007 11:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000830  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2017 TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, OREP, AFIN, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR AMBASSADOR TAHIR-KHELI (MAR 9-19)  REF: STATE 17010  1.  American Embassy Islamabad warmly welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Ambassador Shirin Tahir-Kheli, Senior Advisor to the Secretary of State for Women's Empowerment to Pakistan from March 9-March 19. The purpose of visit is to meet with Pakistani officials, politicians, and members of civil society on issues of women's empowerment. Details on hotel arrangements and meeting requests will be sent in a subsequent email.  2.  Control Officer for the visit will be Political Officer Divya Swamy.  Ms. Swamy's contact information is as follows: Embassy: 92-51-208-2921, Mobile: 92-300-501-8813, Email: SwamyDL@state.gov. The Embassy's main switchboard number is: 92-51-208-0000 and can be reached 24 hours a day.  3. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  4.  Hotel Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts.  Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006. A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked. Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  5.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation.  6. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty  employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water. Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/22/2007 13:25", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 000845  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/21/2017 TAGS: IN, KNNP, MCAP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: UPCOMING PAKISTANI BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S/NF)  On February 22, 2007, MFA Director (Disarmament Cell) Mohammed Kamran Akhtar advised PolCouns that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) will conduct a test of a ground-based surface-to-surface ballistic missle.  The launch window is February 23-27, 2007.  Per existing agreements with India, Akhtar said that the GOP has already notified New Delhi of this test.  Akhtar indicated that Pakistan has also advised other neighboring capitals of the test, including Beijing, Kabul and Tehran. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "06STATE202349", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/24/2007 6:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000872  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: KAWC, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: GOP INQUIRY INTO GTMO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARDS, REPATRIATION OF DETAINEES  REF: 06 STATE 202349  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (U)  This cable contains an action request -- please see para. 5.  2.  (C//NF)  During a January 26 lunch with visiting SCA DAS John Gastright, MFA officials queried emboffs regarding the prospects for the release of Pakistani detainees currently in custody at the Guantanamo Bay detention center.  During the conversation, the Pakistani diplomats referred to a note verbale addressing administrative review boards at the Guantanamo Bay detention center.  Emboffs advised the MFA officials that the Embassy's Political Section had not/not received such a diplomatic note.  On February 15, MFA (Americas) Director Mansoor Khan passed to PolCouns a copy of a note verbale dated 30 December 2006 (text below), and asked for a read-out of the most recent proceedings involving Pakistani nationals. Khan again pressed Pakistan's request for repatriation of the Guantanamo detainees.  PolCouns referred Khan to the Department's most recent guidance on the release of these detainees (Ref A), but agreed to advise the Department of the Government's continuing interest in this issue.  3.  (C)  Text of the MFA's December 2006 note verbale:  (Begin text.)  No. USA-2/16/2006 30 December 2006        The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America in Islamabad and has the honour to refer to communications regarding Administration Review Board (ARB) proceedings in respect of three Guantanamo detainees: (1) Mr. Mohammad Ghulam Ahmed Rabbani, (2) Mr. Saifullah Paracha, and (3) Hafes Qari Mohammad Saad Madni.        The Government of Pakistan wishes to convey that:  (a) the individuals are Pakistani nationals, (b) the Government of Pakistan may accept the individuals, (c) the relatives of individuals have been notified of Annual Review Board, and (d) on transfer from Guantanamo Bay, intelligence gathered about the activities of individuals, if significant, could be shared.        The U.S. Embassy is requested to convey the information to the relevant U.S. authorities for holding the Administration Review Boards in respect of the above three Guantanamo detainees.        The Ministry of Foreign Affairs avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the esteemed Embassy the assurance of its highest consideration.  4.  (C//NF)  Comment:  The Government of Pakistan is sensitive to the public's frustration over the continued detention of Pakistani nationals at the GTMO facilities.  MFA officials frequently ask emboffs for the status of these detainees, as they remain high-profile cases in the local press.  5.  (C)  Action request:  Post requests Department forward as much information as possible to share with the Government of Pakistan regarding the administrative review board proceedings for all Pakistani nationals currently in detention at Guantanamo Bay. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 10:37", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 000890  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR S-ES/O  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: IN, KNNP, MCAP, PK, PREL SUBJECT: UPCOMING PAKISTANI BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  (S/NF) On February 26, MFA Director (Disarmament Cell) Mohammed Kamran Akhtar advised PolOff that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) will conduct a test of a ground-based ballistic missle.  The launch window is February 27-March 3, 2007.  Per existing agreements with India, Akhtar said that the GOP has already notified New Delhi of this test.  Akhtar indicated that Pakistan has also advised other neighboring capitals of the test, including Beijing, Kabul and Tehran. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 12:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000895  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/19/2016 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAKISTAN PUSHES MIDDLE-EAST PEACE INITIATIVE FORWARD   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary and comment.  Pakistani Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri convened a meeting in Islamabad of the Foreign Ministers from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia.  The session was billed as a continuation of President Musharraf's efforts to work with like-minded Muslim states to resolve the Israel-Arab dispute, to stem violence in Iraq, to stabilize Lebanon, and to de-escalate tensions over Iran's nuclear program. The fact that the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Saudi Arabia agreed to attend a Mideast-focused event hastily organized by a non-Arab state seems to indicate that, like the Pakistanis, other Muslim nations are deeply worried that sectarianism and militancy could spill out of Iraq at a dangerous rate. Paragraph 3 contains an action request: Post asks the Department to request action adressees to provide feedback on what attendees are saying about the meeting and about plans for a like-minded summit in Saudi Arabia. End summary and comment.  Pakistan Urges FM's to Solve Middle East's Problems --------------------------------------------- ------ 2. (C) On February 24, Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri called together fellow Foreign Ministers from key Islamic capitals to drive forward the Middle-East peace initiative President Musharraf initiated in January (Reftel). The Pakistani Foreign Ministry described the meeting as a \"one day consultation\" designed to prepare for a summit in Saudi Arabia. A joint-statement issued by Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and several editorial accounts of the meeting indicate that the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Indonesia, and Malaysia \"viewed with deep distress the conflict in Iraq,\" fear that sectarian tensions will spill across Iraq's borders, and worry about a \"festering\" Palestinian dispute, violence in Lebanon, and rising tensions over Iran's nuclear program.  The Foreign Ministers agreed--in principle--on the need for a Muslim world peace initiative to solve Palestinian conflict and the other crises in the region.  3. (C) This is an action request. We would appreciate any feedback from action addressees as to what the Foreign Ministers in attendance thought of the meeting and of Musharraf's initiative. We are also interested in hearing about a planned summit in Saudi Arabia, an idea Musharraf says he broached during his recent visit to Mecca. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD189|07ISLAMABAD625", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 12:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000896  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: MOSQUE DESTRUCTION STANDOFF CONTINUES TO CHALLENGE GOVERNMENT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 0625      B. ISLAMABD 22512      C. ISLAMABAD 189  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary. Four weeks in, approximately 200 female students of the Madrassa Hafza continue to occupy a children's library to protest the Islamabad Capital Development Authority's initiative to raze and relocate illegally constructed mosques.  Reporters who have visited the girls and women occupying the library tell us that the rooms surrounding the sit-in area are staffed by heavily armed male militants, including some with known ties to al-Qa'ida.  (Note: According to press reports, the Lal Mosque, which adjoins the madrassa, has in the past frequently broadcast al-Qa'ida propaganda over its loudspeakers. End note.) Ongoing negotiations with \"representatives\" of the girls/women -- and significant government concessions that include empowering a 12-member committee of ulema with making the final decision on mosque destruction -- have not swayed the leadership of the Madrassa. A desire to avoid actions that would injure or kill young girls, along with political sensitivities this election year, have motivated the government to act with extreme caution, despite growing public sentiment that the standoff poses a direct challenge to the government's writ and to its anti-militancy rhetoric.  The Interior Ministry and Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) Police have prepared for an operation to end the sit-in, bringing 700 female police officers and extra riot gear to the capital two weeks ago, but sources say senior government officials remain reticent about authorizing the action. End summary.  Girls' Sit-in, Into Week 4, Becomes Talk Of The Town --------------------------------------------- ------- 2.  (SBU) Roughly 200 female students of the Jamia Hafza Madrassa continue their four-week-old sit-in at a government owned children's library adjacent to the Lal Mosque (ref A). The girls and women are protesting the Capital Development Authority (CDA)'s initiative to demolish and relocate illegally constructed mosques and madrassas, including a portion of their own institution.  Government officials, in an attempt to settle the standoff peacefully, have engaged in a series of protracted negotiations and made significant concessions. On February 12, the Minister of Religious Affairs, negotiating on behalf of the government, announced a settlement: the girls would leave the library if the CDA would cease issuing demolition notices to illegally constructed mosques. The government has authorized a 12-member committee of ulema to decide which mosques were impinging on government road or development projects and to negotiate alternate sites to relocate such facilities.  The government also agreed to rebuild one of the mosques the CDA demolished earlier in February.  3. (SBU) The concessions did not end the standoff.  In subsequent days the girls escalated their redlines, demanding the government legalize all 81 mosques the development authority previously cited as \"illegally built on government land,\" as well as to legalize the sections of their madrassa that the government recently announced it would demolish because it exceeded the size limits allowed in the original building permit. The students also demand the enforcement of sharia in Pakistan.  Operation Iminent...For Two Weeks --------------------------------- 4. (C) Government officials from the CDA, Interior Ministry, and Capital Police tell poloffs that they have been planning an \"operation\" against the girls at the madrassa since February 2nd.  On February 5, Interior Minister Sherpao was  ISLAMABAD 00000896  002 OF 002   quoted as saying, \"we have utilized all options for a peaceful solution...we are left with no other option but using our authority to end the illegal occupation.\"  A few days later, the Interior Minister ordered 700 female police from across Punjab to come to Islamabad with riot-gear; they were to form the back-bone of the operation against the students. As of this week, no operation has been launched, but Interior Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador on February 23rd that the Ministry \"knows who the bad guys are\" among those occupying the library and is working carefully get women and girls out before engaging the heavily armed militants.  Contacts tell post that only President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz can authorize the politically sensitive operation.  5. (C) Comment. The government's inaction against the occupation --and its eagerness to negotiate away government prerogatives -- has been the talk of Islamabad's intelligencia for weeks. Ruling party, opposition, and media contacts all say the government looks weak, torn between enforcing the law and kow-towing to religious parties. The same contacts also note, though, that police actions leading to the deaths of teenage girls would be morally unacceptable, not to mention politically disasterous.  In the end, the entire episode underscores the moral depravity of the militants who are using girls as human shields--and the imperative that the government continue its fight against such extremism. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD189|07ISLAMABAD625|07ISLAMABAD897", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 12:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000897  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: MOSQUE DESTRUCTION STANDOFF CONTINUES TO CHALLENGE GOVERNMENT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 0625      B. ISLAMABD 22512      C. ISLAMABAD 189  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary. Four weeks in, approximately 200 female students of the Madrassa Hafza continue to occupy a children's library to protest the Islamabad Capital Development Authority's initiative to raze and relocate illegally constructed mosques.  Reporters who have visited the girls and women occupying the library tell us that the rooms surrounding the sit-in area are staffed by heavily armed male militants, including some with known ties to al-Qa'ida.  (Note: According to press reports, the Lal Mosque, which adjoins the madrassa, has in the past frequently broadcast al-Qa'ida propaganda over its loudspeakers. End note.) Ongoing negotiations with \"representatives\" of the girls/women -- and significant government concessions that include empowering a 12-member committee of ulema with making the final decision on mosque destruction -- have not swayed the leadership of the Madrassa. A desire to avoid actions that would injure or kill young girls, along with political sensitivities this election year, have motivated the government to act with extreme caution, despite growing public sentiment that the standoff poses a direct challenge to the government's writ and to its anti-militancy rhetoric.  The Interior Ministry and Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) Police have prepared for an operation to end the sit-in, bringing 700 female police officers and extra riot gear to the capital two weeks ago, but sources say senior government officials remain reticent about authorizing the action. End summary.  Girls' Sit-in, Into Week 4, Becomes Talk Of The Town --------------------------------------------- ------- 2.  (SBU) Roughly 200 female students of the Jamia Hafza Madrassa continue their four-week-old sit-in at a government owned children's library adjacent to the Lal Mosque (ref A). The girls and women are protesting the Capital Development Authority (CDA)'s initiative to demolish and relocate illegally constructed mosques and madrassas, including a portion of their own institution.  Government officials, in an attempt to settle the standoff peacefully, have engaged in a series of protracted negotiations and made significant concessions. On February 12, the Minister of Religious Affairs, negotiating on behalf of the government, announced a settlement: the girls would leave the library if the CDA would cease issuing demolition notices to illegally constructed mosques. The government has authorized a 12-member committee of ulema to decide which mosques were impinging on government road or development projects and to negotiate alternate sites to relocate such facilities.  The government also agreed to rebuild one of the mosques the CDA demolished earlier in February.  3. (SBU) The concessions did not end the standoff.  In subsequent days the girls escalated their redlines, demanding the government legalize all 81 mosques the development authority previously cited as \"illegally built on government land,\" as well as to legalize the sections of their madrassa that the government recently announced it would demolish because it exceeded the size limits allowed in the original building permit. The students also demand the enforcement of sharia in Pakistan.  Operation Iminent...For Two Weeks --------------------------------- 4. (C) Government officials from the CDA, Interior Ministry, and Capital Police tell poloffs that they have been planning an \"operation\" against the girls at the madrassa since February 2nd.  On February 5, Interior Minister Sherpao was  ISLAMABAD 00000897  002 OF 002   quoted as saying, \"we have utilized all options for a peaceful solution...we are left with no other option but using our authority to end the illegal occupation.\"  A few days later, the Interior Minister ordered 700 female police from across Punjab to come to Islamabad with riot-gear; they were to form the back-bone of the operation against the students. As of this week, no operation has been launched, but Interior Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador on February 23rd that the Ministry \"knows who the bad guys are\" among those occupying the library and is working carefully get women and girls out before engaging the heavily armed militants.  Contacts tell post that only President Musharraf and Prime Minister Aziz can authorize the politically sensitive operation.  5. (C) Comment. The government's inaction against the occupation --and its eagerness to negotiate away government prerogatives -- has been the talk of Islamabad's intelligentsia for weeks. Ruling party, opposition, and media contacts all say the government looks weak, torn between enforcing the law and kow-towing to religious parties. The same contacts also note, though, that police actions leading to the deaths of teenage girls would be morally unacceptable, not to mention politically disasterous.  In the end, the entire episode underscores the moral depravity of the militants who are using girls as human shields--and the imperative that the government continue its fight against such extremism. End comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 13:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000898  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, AF, PK, PREL SUBJECT: JIRGA INVITATION UPDATE  REF: A. MARTIN/GRENCIK E-MAIL OF 23 FEBRUARY 2007       B. ISLAMABAD 608      C. KABUL 528  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) On February 21, Mark Pont, the UNAMA representative in Islamabad, told us he had heard \"rumors\" that President Karzai had instructed Pir Gilani not to respond to an invitation to visit Islamabad to discuss cross-border or parallel jirgas.  Pont, who is friends with some of Gilani's relatives, was attempting to confirm or put down the rumor. On February 23, Minister of Interior (and Pakistan Jirga Commission Chairman) Sherpao informed the Ambassador that he had indeed invited Gilani to Islamabad some weeks before but had not received a reply.  He said he intended to call Gilani on February 23 or 24 to reiterate the invitation.  2. (C) After the Ambassador's meeting, Embassy Islamabad contacted Embassy Kabul to advise them of the pending phone call. Per ref A, it appears subsequent enquiries by Embassy Kabul ascertained that Pakistan's invitation had been delivered to -- and held up in -- Afghanistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and only forwarded to Gilani in late February.  3. (C) Comment: Whether it was Sherpao's intervention or Embassy Kabul's, we are happy to see the Government of Afghanistan's 25 February press release indicating that Afghanistan has accepted Pakistan's invitation to travel to Pakistan to discuss the cross-border jirgas. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD824|07KABUL559", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/26/2007 13:41", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 000899  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER SHERPAO SAYS PROACTIVE STEPS NECESSARY IN TRIBAL AREAS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 824      B. KABUL 559  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (S/NF) Summary: In a 23 February meeting, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao told the Ambassador that the North Waziristan Agreement must be reviewed because it is not working. Proactive leadership is necessary, he said, from the Governor down to the political agents. Northwest Frontier Province Governor Orakzai's recent statements to the press were not helpful; Sherpao intends to recommend to President Musharraf that Orakzai be removed as governor. Sherpao also thinks targeted strikes against militant leaders will increase the strength of the maliks (tribal leaders) in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and bolster security in the region. End Summary.  2. (S/NF) Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador that it is now time to review the North Waziristan Agreement, as it has not produced the hoped-for effect on security in the region. President Musharraf has tried to empower Tribal Area political agents to take steps against the insurgency, but his efforts have not borne adequate fruit. Musharraf told the political agents, for example, that the Frontier Corps is under their command and that they have an open invitation to call the President directly for support at any time, yet the political agents have not used either resource. Part of the problem, Sherpao said, is a failure of leadership by Governor Orakzai. Orakzai's recent statements to the press (ref B) are not helpful, and it is time for the President to relieve him of his position. Sherpao already has a recommendation for Orakzai's replacement: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Ehsan ul Haq. He is familiar with the issues and, as an ethnic Pashtun, will bring the right leadership to an urgent issue, Sherpao said.  3. (S/NF) Sherpao believes that directly targeting Taliban leadership in the tribal areas will boost the influence of the maliks. Primary targets, he said, are Jalaluddin Haqqani and his sons; Mullah Dadullah; Baitullah Mehsud; and three to five others. If these leaders are eliminated, Sherpao said, their supporters will lose momentum.  4. (S/NF) Sherpao also provided the Ambassador an update on the Government's crackdown on Al Rashid and Al Akhtar trusts, both designated as al Qaeda and Taliban-associated organizations by the UN 1267 sanctions committee. Sherpao provided the Ambassador with an internal government document accounting for 25 Al Rashid and 15 Al Akhtar offices that had been closed/sealed throughout the country. Sherpao added that government officials have identified 2 million Pk rupees (approximately USD 33,000) that had passed through al Akhtar from a man in Quetta to another unidentified person. The money subsequently went missing, Sherpao said, and the government is following up on it. (Note: Ref A reported on the initial closures and the surrounding media coverage. Post will report on the memo received 23 February septel. End Note.)  5. (S/NF) Comment: Ehsan ul Haq is a former head of Inter-Services Intelligence and a member of Musharraf's inner circle. He could bring new energy to an extremely complex problem. Post is considering the implications of a possible ul Haq replacement, but if the President relieves Orakzai of his duties, his replacement would be the fourth NWFP governor in two years. End Comment.  ISLAMABAD 00000899  002 OF 002   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD709", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "2/28/2007 9:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 000954  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2017 TAGS: PREFF, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S REFUGEE REPATRIATION PLAN WORRIES UNHCR  REF: ISLAMABAD 00709  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Representatives from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)'s Geneva office met with the DCM on February 19th.  The representatives expressed concern that, in Pakistan's desire to close camps and reduce its refugee population, the government might violate UNHCR repatriation principles or begin repatriations before a proper plan was in place on both sides of the border.  The representatives worried that the international community was backing an effort to repatriate Afghans to an environment that, because of the anticipated spring offensive, would not be safe or sustainable for returnees.  UNHCR also asked the U.S. to be prepared to ask Pakistan to host additional refugees should the anticipated Taliban spring offensive lead to new Afghan refugee flows.  End summary.  2.  (C)  On February 19, UNHCR Geneva and UNHCR Islamabad representatives called on the DCM to discuss Pakistan's plan to close refugee camps and encourage refugees to return to Afghanistan.   UNHCR Geneva Director Janet Lim said that UNHCR had serious reservations about Pakistan's plans--or lack thereof--to close four Afghan refugee camps this year. In particular, UNHCR worried that its basic principles (voluntary repatriation, alternative sites for refugees unwilling/unable to return, and orderly camp closures) might be violated.  Lim asked that the U.S. be prepared to speak out if Pakistan and Afghanistan did not follow these principles when dealing with camp closures  3. (C) Lim noted that the Government of Afghanistan was unprepared and unable to accept a large inflow of refugees from Pakistan. Pakistan was looking for a \"quick-fix\" absent adequate preparation on both sides of the border, she said. To make returns sustainable and long-term, Afghanistan and the international community should invest more time and money in reconstruction and livelihood schemes.  The international community should assist the Afghan government articulate its needs relating to the repatriation process.  Potential Effects of the Spring Offensive -----------------------------------------  4. (C)  For the first time, UNHCR representatives articulated concerns over the potential for a Taliban spring offensive to create new refugee flows into Pakistan.  If a spring offensive were to create a large influx of Afghan refugees, UNHCR asked that the US help to persuade Pakistan to \"handle them graciously,\" as it had for the past 27 years.  Comment --------- 5. (C)  We, along with most of our NATO allies, continue to encourage Pakistan to close refugee camps, many of which have become breeding grounds for security problems that impact Afghanistan.  Pakistan agrees the camps should be closed, though it also understands its international obligations and has never indicated to us that it would consider violating UNHCR policies.  Indeed, the recent announcement that Pakistan would use national funds to enhance the repatriation package being offered to families who agree to return to Afghanistan signals that Pakistan is committed to voluntariness.  As UNHCR notes, though, before large numbers of refugees voluntarily return home, they will need to know they have security, shelter, and a livelihood waiting for them.  End  comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/3/2007 8:38", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001021  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/01/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK SECURITY FORCES CAPTURE HIGH-LEVEL TALIBAN LEADER MULLAH OBAIDULLAH AKHUND  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Local newspapers reported on March 2 that Pakistani security forces had captured high-ranking Taliban leader Mullah Obaidullah Akhund, along with up to five others, on February 26 in Quetta. An anonymous Pakistani official said that two of those captured with Obaidullah \"could be\" Amir Khan Haqqani, a Taliban commander in Zabul, and Abdul Bari, the former governor of Helmand province.  2.  (S/NF)  This is Obaidullah,s second arrest. He surrendered to Afghan security forces in early 2002, but was later released as part of a broad Taliban amnesty deal with the Afghan government.  3. (S/NF) Comment: This is an important arrest. Many consider Obaidullah to be the military chief of the Taliban forces and the third highest ranking Taliban member. He is also one of the most senior Taliban officials arrested since the group was ousted from power in November 2001. Obaidullah is reputed to be a key Taliban fund-raiser who was responsible for doling out operational funds. Some observers believe Obaidullah's capture could cause logistical and organizational disruptions, albeit only temporarily. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/3/2007 11:26", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001028  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2017 TAGS: IN, MNUC, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: FM KASURI'S FEBRUARY 20-21 VISIT TO NEW DELHI   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, For Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  In a March 1 meeting with PolOff, MFA Director-General for South Asian Affairs Jalil Jilani provided a readout of Foreign Minister Kasuri's February 20-21 visit to New Delhi.  Jilani previewed the upcoming March 6 anti-terror talks in Islamabad and described the nuclear accord signed during the Kasuri visit.  Other topics reported septel Notal.  End Summary.  Pakistan preparing for anti-terror talks ----------------------------------------  2.  (C)  According to Jilani, Pakistan is preparing \"seriously and sincerely\" for the March 6 Indo/Pak anti-terror talks in Islamabad, the first such talks since the two governments agreed to an \"anti-terror mechanism\" in Havana in September last year.  While the meetings will focus on \"real-time intelligence sharing,\" the Pakistani Government will also solicit the Indians' take on confronting extremism in India.  Tariq Osman Hyder, Additional Secretary of the Pak MFA's International Organization directorate, hopes the two sides can share best practices in cracking down on extremist and militant groups.  Jilani pointed out that the media will likely be clamoring for information on whether the Indians share intelligence related to the Samjhauta train bombing, and noted that Kasuri thanked Mukherjee while in Delhi for the Indian Government's cautious public posture on the tragic event.  Nuclear accord formalizes cooperation ----------------------------------  3.  (C)  On the agreement signed to reduce risks of nuclear accidents between the two countries, Jilani said that both governments had for several months wanted to re-affirm their commitment to nuclear confidence-building in the current positive bilateral atmosphere.  Jilani stated that the agreement formalized specific steps the two governments would take in the event of an accident involving their nuclear arsenals.  The agreement shall remain in force for five yers and can be extended for another five years. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD898", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/7/2007 13:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001094  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAK MFA SAYS AFGHAN JIRGA COMMISSION COMING MARCH 10TH OR 11TH  REF: ISLAMABAD 898  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C//NF) In a March 7 phone call with PolOff, the Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed that the Afghan jirga commission will visit Islamabad for meetings with the Pakistani jirga commission March 10 or March 11. The Ministry is waiting for confirmation of exact dates from Kabul.  The jirga commission meetings will be a \"one day affair\" held at the Ministry of Interior and presided over by Pakistani jirga commission head and Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao.  The Ministry hopes the meeting will be followed by a press conference or a press release. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07SECSTATE21535", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/8/2007 10:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001103  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  ISN/WMDT TIM KATSAPIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/07/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, KNNP, PK, RS SUBJECT: PAKISTANI QUESTIONS ABOUT THE GLOBAL INITIATIVE TO COMBAT NUCLEAR TERRORISM  REF: A. SECSTATE 021535       B. SECSTATE 026678      C. SECSTATE 027320  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) PolOff met March 5 with Kamran Akhtar, Director of the Pakistan Foreign Ministry's Disarmament Cell, to invite the Government of Pakistan to participate in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.  Akhtar said that Pakistan supported the initiative in principle but would not sign the Statement of Principles because of concerns over the Terms of Reference.  Akhtar stated that the Terms of Reference, while exempting NPT-signatories' military facilities from inspection, do not similarly exempt non-NPT signatories' military facilities.  He noted that if the Terms of References were re-worded to include an exemption for non-NPT states' military facilities, Pakistan would strongly consider joining the initiative.  Akhtar further noted that if no such exemption could be included, Pakistan would consider enjoying \"observer status,\" if offered.  Akhtar also suspected India and Israel had similar concerns.  2.  (C) As instructed in ref A, post approached the Russian Embassy to propose jointly approaching the Government of Pakistan about the Global Initiative.  The Russian Embassy did not respond.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD637", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/11/2007 11:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001124  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S CHIEF JUSTICE SUSPENDED  REF: ISLAMABAD 637  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: On March 9, President Pervez Musharraf suspended Pakistan's Chief Justice of the Supreme Court Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry on various corruption charges. Chaudhry had developed a reputation for judicial activism during his short time on the bench and ruled against the Government of Pakistan in several high-profile cases. Islamabad's legal and media circles are abuzz with speculation about what motivated the President, but genuine facts are scarce.  Whether this is a case of high-level corruption or part of a broader struggle for control of the judiciary, the hands-on manner in which President Musharraf went about suspending Chaudhry has seized the attention of the media.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ---------- MUSHARRAF SUSPENDS CHIEF JUSTICE, ACTING CHIEF SWORN IN --------------------------------------------- ----------  2. (C) Around 11:00 a.m. on March 9, President Pervez Musharraf summoned Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry to Army House in Rawalpindi to inform him that the President was suspending him as Chief Justice \"for misconduct, misuse of authority, and actions prejudicial to the dignity of the office of the chief justice of Pakistan.\"  Embassy contacts report that Chaudhry spent over five hours at Army House and that he refused to resign on the spot.  When Chaudhry attempted to return to his office, security personnel escorted him home.  Media and Embassy contacts have told PolOffs privately that Chaudhry is under unofficial house arrest.  He served only 21 months of a term that was supposed to last until 2013.  3. (C) After meeting with Chaudhry, Musharraf appointed Justice Javed Iqbal as Acting Chief Justice.  Iqbal was third in line for the position -- the second in line, Justice Rana Bhagwandas, a Hindu approaching retirement, was reportedly in India on leave.  (Comment: It is unclear whether Bhagwandas will assume the Acting role when he returns to Pakistan. Bhagwandas is known as an honest judge.  If he is skipped in favor of Iqbal -- who many see as a more malleable justice -- opposition and media groups may call foul. End Comment.)  4. (SBU) Iqbal hastily took the oath of office and brought the Supreme Judicial Council into session.  The Supreme Judicial Council, which is responsible for hearing complaints of misconduct against high-level judges, is composed of the Supreme Court's three senior-most judges and two Chief Justices from the country's four Provincial High Courts. (Note:  That the Chief Justices from Karachi and Lahore, who will sit on the Supreme Judicial Council, happened to be in Islamabad when all of this transpired has only fed conspiracy theorists' suspicions. End Note.)  The Supreme Judicial Council's first order of business under Iqbal was to call Chaudhry to a March 13 session to answer the charges against him.  There is precedent for such a move -- Chaudhry is the fifth judge in Pakistan's history to face this type of \"presidential reference.\" In the previous four cases, two judges resigned and the other two were expelled from the high court.  --------------------- AN ACTIVIST JUDGE ---------------------  5. (C) Chaudhry had brought a streak of judicial activism to  ISLAMABAD 00001124  002 OF 002   the Chief Justice position, making several decisions that observers believe irritated the government, including:  -- Pressing the government to find and release 41 missing persons assumed to have \"disappeared\" at the hands of intelligence agencies. -- Blocking the privatization of Pakistan Steel Mills. -- Canceling the lease of an Islamabad public park to a private developer. -- Pursuing cases alleging that the government overcharged for petroleum products.  6. (SBU) Negative stories about Chaudhry and, more specifically, his son Arsalan Iftikhar Chaudhry seemed to increase in recent weeks.  Local media reported January 30 that a high court lawyer had lodged a complaint against Arsalan with the National Accountability Board (NAB) for corruption and abuse of power (reftel).  In mid-February, pro-government lawyer and television anchor Naeem Bokhari wrote an open letter to Chief Justice Chaudhry alleging that Arsalan used his position to secure government jobs and special treatment.  7. (C) Comment:  In this land of conspiracy theories, a new one has blossomed every 30 seconds since the announcement of the Chief Justice's suspension.  Speculation focuses on why Musharraf personally intervened to suspend the Chief Justice rather than seeking other routes, such as impeachment or a criminal investigation.  Until more facts become available, such speculation should be taken with a healthy helping of salt.  End Comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/12/2007 13:32", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001147  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR F AMBASSADOR TOBIAS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: OPERATIONAL PLAN REVIEW - PAKISTAN  1. We look forward to the upcoming Operational Plan Review for Pakistan, scheduled to take place in Washington on March 13.  2. In advance of that review, let us quickly highlight two items that were noted in the transmittal memo for our Operational Plan in early February: First, the importance of maintaining the annual budget support line item at $200 million; and, second, the importance of moving forward on a new security and development initiative for the frontier areas bordering Afganistan, starting with the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).  3. The Operational Plan submitted in early February used control figures provided by Washington within the context of a Continuing Resolution that necessarily had to anticipate \"worst case\" scenarios.  We understand that the Continuing Resolution that was actually approved by Congress provides for a somewhat more robust foreign assistance budget, hopefully allowing for some further flexibility as the Operational Plan review unfolds.  4. For Pakistan, two issues are especially important:  -- CASH TRANSFER: FY 2007 marks the third year of a five-year commitment of ongoing U.S. assistance to Pakistan.  For the last two years, we have maintained the budget support part of that commitment at $200 million, with all obligations occurring prior to the end of the Pakistan fiscal year on June 30.  The budget support also provides an important foundation for an annual dialogue on shared economic objectives.  In addition, the Government of Pakistan annually provides the equivalent of $200 million in local currency to help meet its commitment to increase expenditures in health, education and welfare.  Given initial control figures from Washington, the initial Operating Plan shows a budget support of $152 million this fiscal year.  We very much hope that as part of the Operational Plan review, this figure can now be increased to $200 million.  -- SUPPORT FOR FATA: The initial Operational Plan transmittal memo noted that additional funding might be available for FATA later in the year, possibly entailing \"subsequent adjustments in the current operational plan.\"  Under any scenario, the Operational Plan needs to be adjusted to launch initial activities in FATA under the \"peace and security\" objective implemented by USAID, including a new initiative focused on capacity building in key FATA-related institutions, including the FATA Secretariat and the new FATA Development Authority (FDA).  5. Over the past several months, the country team has developed extensive documentation on a proposed initiative to support the Government of Pakistan's own Sustainable Development Plan, which is about to be officially issued. This documentation includes a strategy for supporting Government of Paksitan efforts in FATA discussed in Washington in December and a program summary aimed at developing a new, stand-alone Strategic Objective within the peace and security area of the Operational Plan that is now being finalized.  Again, as the Operational Plan discussion takes place this week, we are firmly convinced that adjustments need to be made in the current Operational Plan to ensure that a new multi-year development initiative is launched in FATA in FY 2007 rather than having to wait until FY 2008.   ISLAMABAD 00001147  002 OF 002   6. Thanks again for your efforts to undertake the challenging and important task of consolidating foreign assistance budgets and ensuring that country teams launch complementary programs that focus on important national objectives.  This has definitely taken place within the Islamabad country team at this critical juncture in the U.S.-Pakistan partnership. Again, we very much hope that the two adjustments envisaged when we submitted the initial Operating Plan in early February -- one focused on the budget support line item, the other on a FATA intiative appearing under the peace and security objective -- will be made during the upcoming Washington review.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1124", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/13/2007 14:51", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001176  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/13/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: NATIONWIDE PROTESTS FOLLOW CHIEF JUSTICE'S SUSPENSION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 01124       B. ISLAMABAD 637  Classified By: Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and(d)  1.  (C) Summary. President Musharraf's March 9 suspension of Supreme Court Chief Justice Ifthikar Chaudhry has ignited the ire of Pakistan,s legal community and consumed the attention of the press and intelligentsia.  Hundreds -- perhaps thousands -- of lawyers and other sympathizers protested nationwide on March 12 and 13.  The protests were the first time in recent memory that progressives like the PPP's Aitzaz Ahsan could be seen should-to-shoulder with leaders of the religious parties.  Legal groups and opposition parties have called for a general strike in many cities for March 14, while opposition parties are organizing a nationwide strike for March 16.  Some members of the ruling PML-Q and MQM coalition tell us they are embarrassed by President Musharraf's actions. Some of the most respected members of the Government, including the Attorney General and the Minister of Interior, have been noticeably silent throughout the controversy.  The March 12 decision of the government to close two private television stations for 20 minutes after they ran talk shows critical of the President's actions toward the Chief Justice have only added fuel to people's anger.  End Summary.  Angry Lawyers In The Streets -------------------------------  2. (SBU) Pakistan's legal community, the most well-organized unit of civil society in Pakistan, is furious about President Musharraf's suspension of the Supreme Court Chief Justice. On March 12, protesters in Lahore, Karachi, Islamabad, and smaller cities blocked major thoroughfares, threw stones and other objects at the police, and boycotted the courts.  In Lahore on March 12, protesters clashed with police, leading to several injuries from \"baton-charges\". The protests paralyzed the business district for five hours and received widespread press attention.  Demonstrations continued in Lahore, Islamabad, and Karachi on March 13th.  During the March 13 Islamabad protests, senior opposition politicians Qazi Hussain Ahmed (Jamaat-e Islami), Fazlur Rahman (Jamiat-e Ulema-e Islam), and Aitzaz Ahsan (PPP), and other representatives of civil society organizations joined the lawyers.  The MMA, PML-N, and PPP all plan large protests on Friday.  3.  (U)  The Supreme Judicial Council hearing the complaint against the Chief Justice met March 13 in closed session for one hour and 45 minutes and then adjourned.  Afterward, Aitzaz Ahsan, who is representing the justice, told the press he had filed a publication with the Supreme Judicial Council objecting to its composition and to the \"in camera\" nature of the proceedings.  Universal Agreement: President Handled This Badly ------------------------------------------ 4.  (C)  Four days after the suspension, and without a detailed explanation from the President, the rumor mill is offering up theories of the Musharraf,s motivation that range from his wanting a malleable court that will rule in his favor on election-oriented questions to his being angry over court decisions that ended his privatization plan for Pakistan Steel.  The few Musharraf supporters who have spoken publicly in favor of the President,s actions have generally not helped the President.  Some, for instance, have cited as  ISLAMABAD 00001176  002 OF 002   an example of the Chief Justice's corruption his demand for an armored vehicle when he visited Quetta.  (Comment:  An armored vehicle for the Chief Justice of Pakistan, particularly given recent violence against jurists, does not seem particularly profligate.  End Comment.)  5. (C) A pulse of journalists, lawyers, and politicians from across Pakistan suggests that there is near-universal agreement among the elites that President Musharraf mishandled the Chief Justice's fate.  PML President Chaudhry Shujaat told Ambassador March 13 that neither he nor the Prime Minister had been told anything about Musharraf,s plan to suspend the justice.  Minister of Health Mohammed Naseer Khan told Ambassador that the suspension was \"very bad\" and had given the opposition a \"stick to whack us with.\"  PML leaders in Punjab told Consulate Lahore that they were worried Musharraf's actions would reflect negatively on them.  Their sentiment was echoed by other coalition partners, who said Musharraf's silence on the issue was handing the opposition an opportunity to unite.  6. (C) Opposition politicians, meanwhile, criticized Musharraf's actions as another step towards undermining Pakistan's institutions of democracy.  PML-N MNA Tehmina Daultana  told us that \"Musharraf is destroying the foundations of this country and bringing the institutions under his foot one at a time.\"  Liaquat Baloch, JI's Deputy Amir, said the MMA believed Musharraf's actions were unconstitutional and that Musharraf only suspended the Chief Justice because he had personal motives. Others echoed the questioning of Musharraf's personal involvement, saying that corruption allegations against judicial and government officials are rampant, but Musharraf normally does not intervene.  7. (C)  The one thing that lawyers and Musharraf supporters seem to agree on is that Musharraf was technically within his constitutional rights to suspend the justice.  The problem, most note, is optics and transparency.  The President,s intervening so personally, rather than simply referring the charges to the Judicial Council, looks high-handed and un-democratic.  Meanwhile, the decision to place Chaudhry under unofficial house-arrest and to deny him contact with the outside world seems, to some contacts, petty.  As MQM Deputy Convenor Farooq Sattar told us, \"to file a reference against the sitting Justice is Musharraf's discretion, but restricting his movements and cutting him off from visitors, his lawyers, and his family is raising people's hackles.\" (Note:  Reports late on March 13 indicate that restrictions on Chaudhry,s contacts with the outside world may have lessened.  End Note.)  Comment ------- 8. (C) The legal community and the opposition are unlikely to back down easily.  A combination of a transparent Supreme Judicial Council hearing, a public explanation by Musharraf, and a tempered reaction by law enforcement officials to protests on March 16 could cool some of the anger. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/14/2007 13:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001194  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: AITZAZ AHSAN ON HIS LATEST CLIENT:  THE CHIEF JUSTICE   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  On March 13, Aitzaz Ahsan, a lead attorney for now \"suspended\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, told Ambassador that the five-day-old saga of the Chief Justice was \"maximum political theater.\"  Seeming to relish his role in the drama (it is hard to turn on the television without seeing Aitzaz these days), Pakistan's top civil rights attorney said the Supreme Judicial Council hearings \"would be fun.\"  2.  (C)  Aitzaz' tactic in the hearings will be to prove that, even if his client is guilty of ethics violations, some of the justices on the SJC are guilty of the same or even worse offenses.  On the other hand, the government's prosecutor, the Attorney General, is universally held in high esteem.  (Note:  During recent Supreme Court cases regarding missing persons in Pakistan, the Attorney General quietly sided with petitioners demanding information from the security services on missing family members.  He told us he was obligated to do so as an officer of the court and a supporter of the rule of law.  End Note.)  3.  (C)  Aitzaz described the opening session of the Supreme Judicial Council as \"bizarre.\"  The \"in camera\" proceedings took place in a salon, with all participants sitting on sofas.  Justice Chaudhry traded accusations with the five justices on the Council, a common one being \"If I ever intervened to help my son, you've done it twice over.\" Aitzaz described the proceedings/sparring as \"preliminary,\" noting the real hearings will begin on Friday, March 16. Aitzaz' first order of business will be to have the proceedings moved into a public setting.  He noted that, while the 1970-1971 proceedings against Sheikh Shaukat Aziz had been held in camera, the defendant had requested such an arrangement.  Chaudhry wanted public proceedings, and Aitzaz seemed to believe he would prevail on that score.  (Note: Opening the hearings to the public is a chief demand of the bar associations that have protested throughout Pakistan this week.  End Note.)  4.  (C)  Despite Aitzaz' status as a senior PPP leader, his goal is to prevent the hearings from being hijacked by politicians, particularly from the religious parties.  (MMA politicians have been prominent in pro-Chaudhry protests around the country.)  Aitzaz said his defense posture would be to attack the judges on the Supreme Judicial Council, not Musharraf.  Aitzaz also said it was important not to let this issue be hijacked by the religious parties.  5.  (C)  Comment:  While many observers agree with Aitzaz' low opinion of several of the justices on the Supreme Judicial Council, the litigators themselves -- Aitzaz and the Attorney General -- are first rate lawyers, scholars, and supporters of the civil society.  Like the rest of Pakistan, we will be watching the Chief Justice's story play out in the Supreme Judicial Council.  End Comment.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/16/2007 12:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001234  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  FROM AMBASSADOR CROCKER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: AF, PK, PNAT, PREF, PREL SUBJECT: VIOLENCE ERUPTS AT DEMONSTRATIONS OVER CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Fighting broke out between the police and demonstrators in front of Pakistan's Supreme Court the afternoon of March 16, the second day of the Supreme Judicial Council's proceeding against Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry.  Demonstrations in other cities around Pakistan were tense but less violent than the widely-telecast confrontations in Islamabad.  (Note:  Unofficial estimates of crowd size were less than a thousand total in various locations in Islamabad; about 1,200 in Peshawar; about 1,000 in Karachi; and less than 1,000 in Lahore.  End Note.)  RSO Islamabad reports that demonstrators in Islamabad self-segregated, with representatives of religious parties forming one group, lawyers another, and civil society and mainline political groups another.  Television reports showed demonstrators near the Supreme Court throwing rocks at police, who responded by firing tear gas into crowds of several hundred protesters.  Television stations carried footage of protesters beating a police officer and throwing rocks.  (Note:  According to RSO, only the religious parties attacked the police.  End Note.)  Press reports indicate that at least two journalists were injured in the disturbances.  A PPP contact called the Embassy from the protests and said that the PPP was present to show solidarity with the Chief Justice, not to harass the police or to mingle with the religious parties.  2.  (U)  Late in the afternoon, police stormed the Islamabad office of GEO television.  The Lahore office of GEO continued to broadcast while lead reporter Hamid Mir, in Islamabad, described police beating employees and breaking equipment. Shortly after Mir went off the air, Minister of Information Durrani issued a public statement saying the police had had no right to enter the newsroom.  3.  (C)  Police took great pains to keep protests small. Roadblocks around the perimeter of Islamabad and every few miles after that turned back almost anyone who might be a protester.  Police arrested or restricted the movements of lawyers and political opposition leaders overnight and throughout the day.  In Lahore, police arrested hundreds of attorneys and placed Jamaati Islami leader Liaqat Baloch and PPP-P leader Qasim Zia under house arrest.  After the Lahore protests turned out to be relatively calm, police released the lawyers.  In Islamabad, police arrested MMA leaders Qazi Hussain Ahmed and Hafiz Hussain Ahmed as they marched towards the Supreme Court after Friday prayers.  PPP reported that police arrested several PPP members at the site of Islamabad protests.  PML-N reported that 17 of their leaders were under arrest.  4.  (SBU)  RSOs throughout Pakistan reported that no official Americans were injured in the protests.  We have received no information of any Americans injured in the demonstrations. We are aware of no demonstrations scheduled for the weekend.  5.  (C)  Comment:  By Islamabad standards, these demonstrations have been small and relatively non-violent. This is especially true when compared to February 2006 demonstrations associated with the Danish cartoon controversy.  Thus far, the mainline opposition parties have taken pains not to be seen cooperating with the religious parties in the protests.  Indeed, the Chief Justice controversy has not galvanized the opposition into a unified entity nor has it captured widespread support.  We shall continue to monitor this situation and report as appropriate.  End Comment CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE32649", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/17/2007 11:17", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001240  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, KNNP SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR STATE/DOE DELEGATION MARCH 19-23  REF: STATE 32649  1. American Embassy Islamabad grants country clearance and warmly welcomes the visit of SCA/RA Director John Schlosser and ISN/RA Kahtryn Schultz from the Department of State, and Kelly Cummins, Anne Kohnen, Jimmie Collins, Chis Landers, and Greg Herdes from the Department of Energy to Islamabad March 19-23, 2007.  2.  Control Officers for the visit will be Political Officers Tom West and Mike Fernandez.  Mr. West can be reached at 92-51-208-2294; mobile: 92-300-501-2173; email: westTW@state.gov.  3. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa.  If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  4.  Hotel Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are high-threat posts.  Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorists in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006. A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002. American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked. Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  5.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation.  6. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty  employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers.  Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than  good samaritan, care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed.  Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound.  Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken. Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water.  ISLAMABAD 00001240  002 OF 002   Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy. Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure.  For short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country. The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located. Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern.  Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2007 2:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 001267  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: AS PROTESTS OVER CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY CONTINUE, GOVERNMENT SOFTENS APPROACH  REF: ISLAMABAD 1234 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Protests over the proceedings against Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry continued over the weekend, drawing an estimated crowd of 10,000 - 12,000 in Lahore on Saturday. The protests continue to be minimally violent by Pakistani standards. The Chief Justice controversy continues to dominate headlines and conversations, and a nationwide \"wheeljam strike\" is planned for March 21, the next scheduled day for the Supreme Judicial Council's hearing against Chaudhry. President Musharraf called an emergency meeting of senior government officials late March 18 and reportedly chastised them for not providing sufficient public support. At the meeting, he outlined his strategy to deal with the crisis. Musharraf confirmed that Justice Rana Bhagwandas -- the second most senior judge on the Supreme Court -- will assume the role of Acting Chief Justice upon his return from abroad March 23. Throughout the crisis, the Pakistan People's Party has remained low-key. The silence has been partly to allow lawyers' associations to take the lead, but the People's Party is preparing to assume a more public role. Both the Minister of Interior and the Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General acknowledged to Ambassador that holding police accountable for the raid on Geo T.V. will be important. Thus far, the U.S. Government's low-key approach to the controversy has been appropriate, as Pakistan's civil society has risen to the perceived challenge to a free press and judiciary, leaving the U.S. out of the headlines. End Summary.  ----------------- Protests Continue -----------------  2. (U) Protests continued over the weekend and into the week in Lahore, Karachi, and Peshawar. On March 17, demonstrations in Lahore drew 10,000 - 12,000 people. At one point, lawyers began to throw stones and other items at police, who responded in kind and ultimately resorted to baton charges, tear gas, and arrests to subdue the crowd. Sporadic demonstrations continued throughout Lahore on March 19, but no roadblocks or other disruptions were reported. Overall, the protests have been minimally violent by Pakistan standards, especially compared to last year's demonstrations over the Danish cartoons.  3. (U) Protests in Karachi and Peshawar continued throughout the weekend as well, but have been more subdued. A Karachi Bar Association demonstration planned for March 19 was postponed to March 20 due to rain. In the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), lawyers continued to protest on March 17 and March 19 with symbolic one hour strikes at courts in Peshawar and other key cities in the province. (Comment: With the NWFP's MMA government having received a fair degree of criticism in recent months over the deteriorating law and order situation, Peshawar observers expect that the NWFP's provincial government to work hard to maintain a peaceful atmosphere at demonstrations over the Chief Justice's removal. End Comment.)  4. (SBU) A nationwide \"wheeljam protest\" (in which no traffic is allowed to transit major city routes and commercial activities cease) has been announced for March 21, the next scheduled day for the Supreme Judicial Council's hearing  ISLAMABAD 00001267  002 OF 003   against Chaudhry. Political party representatives tell us that police are arresting party organizers in the lead up to the protests, which are scheduled for all cities. Pakistan People's Party officials are expecting routes into Islamabad to be blocked ahead of the March 21 demonstration, and are telling their members not already in Islamabad to remain (and demonstrate) where they are and not to bother coming to the capital city.  ------------------------------------------- President Musharraf Calls Emergency Meeting -------------------------------------------  5. (C) On March 18, President Musharraf called together senior government officials and coalition partners for a hastily-arranged meeting. Press reports and outside observers reported that Musharraf was unhappy that senior government officials had not sufficiently supported him in public, and directed them to fight the opposition's efforts to recast the proceedings against Justice Chaudhry as a crisis. We have already seen government officials carrying out their marching orders to enhance public outreach.  Late on March 19, the Foreign Secretary convened Ambassador to hear the Government's side of the story, which we will report septel.  6. (C) Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General Senator Mushahid Hussain, who attended the meeting, told us that Musharraf outlined his strategy to deal with the crisis. Musharraf confirmed that the ban against the Geo television program \"Aaj Kamran Khan Kay Saath\" (\"Today With Kamran Khan\") will be lifted and that Musharraf will appear on Khan's March 19 show. Musharraf also said that Justice Rana Bhagwandas -- the second most senior judge on the Supreme Court -- will assume the role of Acting Chief Justice and, if he wishes, the head of the Supreme Judicial Council on his March 23 return from India. Although this will slow down the process, Mushahid said, it is important to ensure the credibility of the process and not allow it to become politicized.  ------------------------------------------ Pakistan People's Party Supports Protests, But Public Profile is Low ------------------------------------------  7. (C) Notable in its absence, the Pakistan People's Party has maintained a low public profile since the beginning of the protests. Central Information Secretary Sherry Rehman told PolOff that this has been partly deliberate, since lawyers' associations (many of whose members also belong to the party) have asked that they be allowed to take the lead in the fight against the government. (Note: Party officials estimate that 80-100 Peoples Party members are currently behind bars, but those are mostly lawyers who were demonstrating as law association members. By contrast, Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) officials estimate that they have approximately 57 people behind bars as a result of the protests. End Note.) Even though the lawyers asked to take the lead, they will soon tire, according to Rehman. The People's Party is ramping up to fill the gap. PPP leaders have cleared their calendars for Thursday, Rehman said, because they assume they will be arrested during protests planned for March 21.  8. (C) The People's Party is wary of allowing the protests to play to the advantage of the religious parties, Rehman said,  ISLAMABAD 00001267  003 OF 003   so while there has been contact with the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal religious alliance, coordination has been minimal. Public speculation that the People's Party's silence over the judicial crisis is a signal of an electoral deal with the Musharraf government is wrong, Rehman added. The deal is off, as of now. If Benazir Bhutto were to make any arrangement with Musharraf at this point, she said, workers would leave the party.  --------------------------------------------- ---------------- Government Officials Tell Ambassador Accountability Important --------------------------------------------- ----------------  10. (C) On March 19, Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao told the Ambassador that the police raid on Geo television station was a result of mass confusion after a student radical group started throwing rocks at police from inside the Geo building. When the police stormed the building in response, one of the protesters grabbed a police officer, and then the situation got out of control. Nevertheless, he agreed that accountability for the incident was important. Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General Senator Mushahid Hussain told the Ambassador that he knows the whole Chief Justice situation looks bad, and it is a result of bad advice given to President Musharraf by the Law Minister and the Attorney General. Mushahid agreed with the Ambassador that the Law Minister should be sacked and suggested that Islamabad's Deputy Inspector General of Police should probably be fired as well. Mushahid closed by saying that the government will now have to bend over backwards to prove that there is no judicial crisis and that justice will be done.  ------------------------------ Government Hears Public Outcry ------------------------------  11. (C) Comment: The Chief Justice controversy has shown that elements of Pakistan's civil society are willing to step up to the plate when they see a perceived threat to their constitutional freedoms. Punishment is likely for higher-level police officials who directed the raid against Geo television station, and there likely will be more government affirmations of respect for press freedom. Most importantly, it appears that the Government of Pakistan is anxious to place responsibility for resolving the Chief Justice's suspension into the lap of the Supreme Judicial Council.  12. (C) Comment, cont. The Government appears to be reacting in a measured way to counteract public outcry, but no one is predicting a prompt resolution of the crisis. Without the distraction of the Cricket World Cup (Pakistan lost to Ireland March 18 -- a huge blow to national pride) the media will continue to focus on the Chief Justice controversy. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2007 7:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001270  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: FOREIGN SECRETARY CONVENES AMBASSADOR TO DISCUSS CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan convened Ambassador March 19 to discuss the controversy surrounding President Musharraf's decision to make the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court \"non-functional.\"  Khan stressed that Pakistan was not in a \"crisis situation.\"  He admitted that government officials had made mistakes -- especially the attack on the Islamabad office of Geo television -- but stressed that other issues were being misrepresented.  He noted that the situation was \"difficult\" and that some agitators wanted to \"inflame\" the population.  2.  (C)  Contradicting press reports, Khan said that Musharraf had not invited the Chief Justice Iftikhar to Musharraf's army residence to discuss the charges against the judge.  According to Khan, the Chief Justice had requested the meeting to ask the President to help stop rumors that were circulating about the Chief Justice.  At that meeting, President Musharraf told Iftikhar that the government had received a \"reference\" (official complaint) against the judge.  He gave the reference to the justice, who took considerable time studying the document.  During this time, the President asked the Prime Minister to join the two men at the Camp Office.  3.  (C)  Because the Chief Justice had now read the reference, Musharraf decided it was necessary to act on the reference immediately.  This was, according to Khan, the President's constitutional obligation.  4.  (C)  The Government did not deny that some aspects of security had been mishandled.  The President had apologized for the Geo incident and had agreed to be interviewed for a prime time broadcast the evening of March 19 to demonstrate his commitment to a free press.  The President planned to stress that the government did not intend to limit press freedom.  (Note:  The interview occurred as scheduled.  Post will provide transcript septel.  End Note.)  5.  (C)  Khan also emphasized that the government did not intend to curtail the judiciary's freedom.   The government would abide by constitutional and legal prerogatives.  As such, the government was prohibited from providing details of the reference against the justice, though Iftikhar and his lawyers were free to release the document to the public, if they so chose.  6.  (C)  FS Khan reported that Justice Bhagwandas would return from abroad on March 22 or 23.  He would become Acting Chief Justice upon his return.  Khan said that Bhagwandas could choose to assume the chairmanship of the Supreme Judicial Council if he wished, though he was also free to ask another high court judge to lead the proceedings against the Chief Justice.  Khan emphasized that it was Musharraf's intention to distance himself from the entire matter and let the Council's proceedings develop without interference  7.  (C)  Since the Foreign Secretary had initiated the discussion of this internal legal and political issue, the Ambassador wished to respond with a few comments.  He noted that the U.S. had been as low key and restrained as possible in our own public commentary.  The restraint had not necessarily been easy, given the amount of coverage and opinion in the U.S. press on this controversy.  8.  (C)  Overall, the government's handling of this issue had not made things easy for its friends.  Looking ahead, the secrecy of the reference process and the decision to hold hearings in camera were making a difficult situation worse. The lack of transparency fed the belief that the government  ISLAMABAD 00001270  002 OF 002   was hiding the true reasons for its actions against the Chief Justice.  In particular, secrecy was fueling the belief that the President had acted against the Chief Justice because the government was unhappy over high court decisions on missing persons or the decision against a privatization program.  To quiet these rumors -- and to restore the civil society's faith in the government -- the Supreme Judicial Council process must be perceived as fair, impartial, and without prejudice.  9.  (C)  The Ambassador also stressed the need for accountability.  Western commentators would not deem the firing of a dozen police constables and a police inspector a credible response to the attack on Geo T.V.  Commentators would be watching to see if senior officers were held accountable.  Khan responded that the lower level police may not have actually been ordered to enter Geo.  He had heard rumors that the police had pursued demonstrators into the office or otherwise been provoked into entering.  (Note: Earlier in the day, the Interior Minister gave the same account to the Ambassador.  End Note.)  10.  (C)  As he had earlier in the day with the Minister for the Interior, the Ambassador stressed that both the police and demonstrators needed to show restraint.  The Ambassador worried that some demonstrators might be trying to provoke violent reactions from the police, which would in turn possibly bring out more demonstrators.  The police should behave in a professional manner, he noted, acknowledging the difficulty in such an approach.  (Note:  Mission officials continue to stress the same need for restraint with opposition and civil society groups.  End Note.) CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/20/2007 13:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001279  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: IN, MNUC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTANI PRESSURE ON IRAN  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  President Musharraf, Foreign Minister Kasuri, and Foreign Secretary Khan have all recently emphasized to Ambassador that one purpose of Pakistan's \"Moderate Muslim States\" initiative is to pressure Iran to modify its behavior.  Pakistan believes that by not inviting Iran to the February 24 meeting of Muslim Foreign Ministers in Islamabad, the other participants (Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia) have made clear that Tehran must moderate its policies on nuclear development and foreign relations and that it should adopt the Beirut Declaration on the Israel-Palestinian conflict.  Foreign Minister Kasuri says he has told Iranian Foreign Minister Mottaki that Iran must change its unrealistic and destabilizing stances toward Israel, the U.S., and nuclear issues.  Kasuri reports that Iran is flexible on some issues, \"but it absolutely will not break ranks on nuclear enrichment.\"  2.  (C)  President Musharraf visited Tehran in February as part of his outreach to Muslim nations.  According to Khan, Musharraf met with Ahmedinejad to explain the broad parameters of his initiative and to \"clearly convey concerns that Iranian confrontation (with the U.S. and the West) must be prevented.\"  Ahmedinejad responded that Iran was not responsible for tensions.  He also denied Iran was supporting sectarianism in Iraq.  3.  (C)  Musharraf told the Ambassador that, in a phone conversation following the Islamabad Ministerial, Ahmedinejad expressed unhappiness over Iran's exclusion.  Musharraf said he responded that a common point of departure for the seven participating states was the 2002 Beirut Summit Declaration on a two state solution to the Palestinian issue, which Iran rejects.  He said he urged Ahmedinejad to reconsider Iran's position.  Kasuri told the Ambassador separately that the Pakistani Ambassador in Tehran was called in to receive a complaint about the ministerial. The Iranian Ambassador in Islamabad delivered the same complaint.  Kasuri said the Ambassadors received the same reply as Musharraf gave Ahmedinejad.  4.  (C)  Foreign Minister Kasuri and Foreign Secretary Khan recently told Ambassador that Pakistan's initiative was probably one motivator spurring Iran to visit Saudi Arabia in early March.  (Comment:  The connection between the Musharraf initiative and the Ahmedinejad trip to Mecca could take two forms:  The Iranian President may have wanted to convince the Saudis not to cooperate with the Pakistanis; or he may have been trying to prove that he is not averse to dialogue.  End Comment.)  ------------------------------------- Aman 07:  Another Message -------------------------------------  5.  (C)  Pakistani leaders have intimated that one purpose of the recent Aman 07 Naval Exercise was to demonstrate to Iran that the U.S., Pakistan, China, and other countries are able to cooperate militarily.  Mission's Defense Attache's Office and the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan have confirmed that Iran did not/not participate as observers in Aman '07 and that reporting in other channels claiming that Pakistan invited Iran to observe the exercise is inaccurate.  --------------------------------------------- --------------- Moderate Muslim States Initiative:  Its Genesis --------------------------------------------- ----------------  6.  (C)  In a March 16 meeting, Foreign Secretary Khan explained to Ambassador the roots of Musharraf's initiative. He said that various recent visitors to Islamabad, including the King of Jordan, had told Musharraf that like-minded nations should find a way to combat the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.  Khan reported that naysayers, particularly in the Foreign Ministry, warned the President against involving Pakistan in the labyrinth of Middle East problems.  Musharraf countered doubters by asking them four questions: --Is the situation in the Middle East not deteriorating?  ISLAMABAD 00001279  002 OF 002   --Is Pakistan not involved or effected? --If the situation implodes -- e.g. in Iran -- would it not have disastrous consequences on Pakistan? --So should we stand still with folded hands?  7.  (C)  According to Khan, Musharraf began his initiative by contacting Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria.  (Note: Pakistan ultimately excluded Syria from the February Foreign Ministers' meeting because Syria was not adequately committed to playing a helpful role in the Middle East.  End Note.) The original countries agreed on broad parameters on two main issues:  the need for a specific timeline for the establishment of a Palestinian state; and the need to play a constructive role in tamping down sectarian tensions in Iraq.  8.  (C)  Khan said that, at the February 24 meeting of Foreign Ministers from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia, countries were reluctant to \"push Iran\" and Arab representatives seemed uncomfortable over non-Arab countries involving themselves in Middle East issues.  Musharraf responded that, if Muslim countries were serious about resolving Iraq and the Palestinian question, participants should put their reservations aside. Ultimately, all seven Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement viewing \"with deep distress the conflict in Iraq,\" worrying that sectarian tensions would spill across Iraq's borders, and decrying a \"festering\" Palestinian dispute, violence in Lebanon, and rising tensions over Iran's nuclear program.  (Ref A).  9.  (C)  Comment:  In two important ways, Musharraf's moderate Muslim states initiative has already been a success.  It has brought together key foreign ministers, including those from Saudi Arabia and Egypt, on relatively short notice; and it has made Iran uncomfortable.  Musharraf's initiative creates an interesting, unplanned synergy with the UNSC resolution and the Iraq neighboring states initiative. The three actions together provide both incentives and negative consequences to encourage Iran to moderate its behavior.  CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1267", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/21/2007 1:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001280  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY: JUSTICES RESIGN, MUSHARRAF REASSURES, PARLIAMENTARIANS REQUISITION  REF: ISLAMABAD 1267 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Pakistan's press and elite continue to focus on the controversy over Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry's suspension. As of mid-afternoon March 20, the following occurred:  - There were no reports of large-scale demonstrations in any of Pakistan's cities on March 20.  - On March 20, Naseer Saeed Sheikh, one of several Deputy Attorney Generals, resigned.  - The government announced that the March 21 session of the Supreme Judicial Council would be postponed until April 3 -- after Justice Rana Bhagwandas takes the oath as acting Chief Justice. This will allow the government more time to let the situation settle down.  - On March 20, Inspector Khalid Mehmood was arrested in connection with his role in the police raid on Geo television. (Note: Mehmood was reportedly the officer in charge at the time of the raid. End Note.)  - So far, nine justices, including Lahore High Court justice Jawad S. Khawaja, have resigned their posts. Khawaja told reporters that his resignation was a response to police excesses during protests against the Government's handling of the reference against Justice Chaudhry. Others, including First Class Magistrate Rajesh Chandar Rajput (whose brother-in-law happens to be the son of soon-to-be Acting Chief Justice Rana Bhagwandas) said his resignation was in protest against the maltreatment and forced leave of Chief Justice Chaudhry.  - Late March 19, President Musharraf appeared for an interview on Geo television. Musharraf assured viewers that he would not declare a state of emergency and that general elections will be held on time. He also discussed his positions on press freedom (he supports it), the police attack on the Geo office (investigations are underway); and the right to protest (everyone has the right to protest, but \"political elements\" should not become involved).  - Opposition members in the National Assembly are filing a requisition to hold a special session of Parliament. Although the National Assembly is scheduled to hold its next session on March 26, opposition sources hypothesized that the government might delay the session because of the judicial controversy. (Note: A requisition, when appropriately filed, compels the Speaker to summon the National Assembly within 14 days of receipt. End Note.)  - Acting Chief Justice Javed Iqbal ordered Attorney General Makhdoom Ali Khan to appear before the Supreme Court to provide testimony about the police manhandling of Justice Chaudhry. (Note: On March 20, Deputy Attorney General Raja Irshad appeared instead. End Note.)  - The blame game is in full swing. Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, Constitutional Advisor Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, and Law Minister Wasi Zaffar have been singled out so far for supposedly recommending action against Justice Chaudhry in the first place.   ISLAMABAD 00001280  002 OF 002   - Pakistan's capital was buffeted with unseasonably heavy rains on March 19 and early March 20. Weather forecasts for March 21 -- the planned day for the nationwide wheeljam protest -- also predict a chance of rain, which may affect turnout. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1280|07ISLAMABAD637", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/21/2007 12:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001293  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: LAWYERS, POLITICAL PARTIES PROTEST CHIEF JUSTICE'S SUSPENSION  REF: ISLAMABAD 1280 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d )  1. (SBU) On March 21, lawyers and political party members took to the streets once again to protest the suspension of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry. Except for a report that police in Quetta injured several demonstrators, protests nationwide were peaceful.  Islamabad: A group of 300-400 protesters braved heavy morning rains to march from The Blue Area (Islamabad's business district) to the Supreme Court. The weather cleared by midday and approximately 2,500 to 3,000 eventually gathered in front of the Supreme Court. The protest, which was peaceful, dispersed by late afternoon. Protesters included lawyers as well as representatives from both secular political parties -- Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N), Pakistan People's Party (PPP), and Former cricketer Imran Khan's micro party Tehrik-e-Insaf -- and the religious political party coalition Mutahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA). PPP and MMA protesters exchanged public barbs at one another during the protests. The MMA criticized the PPP for distancing itself from the rest of the opposition, while the PPP fired back at the MMA for supporting President Musharraf in passing the 17th amendment to the constitution, which legitimized Musharraf's 1999 takeover.  Lahore: The various Punjab Bar associations called a protest on The Mall (the main street in Lahore's Central Business District). Approximately 1,000 marched toward The Mall to the Punjab High Court building. By midday, 2,000 - 3,000 lawyers had gathered to protest in front of the Punjab High Court. Police contacts report that everything was calm, although lawyers blocked traffic and shut down the city's central business district. Police were under strict instructions from the city and provincial governments not to confront the lawers and to allow them access to protest on The Mall, unlike in previous days. Religious party Jamiat-e-Islami (JI) officials \"greeted\" the lawyers along the march route, but did not mobilize their members for the protest. Crowds dispersed by mid-afternoon without incident.  Peshawar:  There were no visible demonstrations of significant size since March 19.  There have been small gatherings of several students or local residents, including a small group assembled outside Bala Hissar Fort on March 21, but they have not fomented wider protests.  In NWFP, the nationwide strike of courts will likely empty courtrooms on March 22, but post does not expect further demonstrations.  Karachi: Approximately 250 lawyers attended protest meetings and rallies at the city courts in Karachi. The Sindh High Court and Karachi Bar Association cancelled their plans to stage a rally/sit-in at the Chief Minister's residence, so street protests in Karachi were limited to scattered JI demonstrations at approximately 70 crossroads around Karachi.  Quetta: Lawyers in Quetta hoisted black flags at the Pakistan Bar Council headquarters, boycotted court proceedings, and protested in the streets. Turnout numbers were limited (media reports estimated 200), as lawyers in Quetta are divided on the issue of whether to support Justice Chaudhry. (Note: Some blame Chaudhry, who is from Balochistan, for brokering deals with the military and not taking notice of security operations or the killing of prominent tribal leader Nawab  ISLAMABAD 00001293  002 OF 002   Akbar Bugti in August 2006. End Note.) Police used teargas against the demonstrators, which reportedly injured two lawyers. Representatives from both PPP and MMA joined the lawyers in their demonstration.  2. (U) Also on March 21, the news media published the reference against Justice Chaudhry, dated March 9 (available online at http://www.dawn.com/2007/03/21/nat2.htm). The alleged misconduct, which the reference says Prime Minister Aziz received from several sources, includes the Chief Justice:  - Using his position to secure several government jobs for his son for which his son was not qualified. - Securing the use of official vehicles beyond his authorized entitlement of one 1600cc car. - Making unprecedented requests for police motorcade protection. - Demanding that senior bureaucrats meet him on arrival in provincial capitals. - Demanding the use of planes and helicopters for domestic travel. - Changing two verdicts after orally announcing them -- one variance allegedly involved an amount of 55 million rupees (approximately USD 900,000). - Accepting accomodation from a litigant before the Supreme Court  3. (C) Comment: In spite of early rain and the cancellation of the Supreme Judicial Council hearing (rescheduled for April 3), lawyers' associations and political parties still managed to generate a good turnout. The allegations against Justice Chaudhry -- the bulk of which refer to his attempts to secure a government job for his son -- are no surprise (see Islamabad 637). Many of the accusations involve behavior typical of Pakistani officials. Indeed, Justice Chaudhry's attorneys have told us that they will not deny the allegations, but instead point out that the justices on the Supreme Judicial Council do the same things. One of the day's good news stories is the lack of violence from either demonstrators or police. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/23/2007 9:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001329  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  FROM AMBASSADOR CROCKER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: WHAT THE CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY IS. . .AND IS NOT  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Two weeks in -- and occasionally breathless commentary in the international press aside -- observers increasingly believe that President Musharraf's government has not been seriously wounded by the Chief Justice controversy.  Barring the outbreak of widespread street violence leading to civilian deaths, we do not see Musharraf's situation changing in the near future.  Indeed, if anything, some good may eventually come of this episode.  2.  (C)  While things can change quickly in this country, we present here some important observations.  WHAT THE CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY IS NOT -- AS OF NOW  3.  (C)  THIS IS NOT AN IMMINENT THREAT TO MUSHARRAF'S RULE: He has weathered worse storms, including the public reaction to the Damadola attack; the Danish Cartoon protests; and two assassination attempts.  Both Damadola and the Danish cartoons resonated with the poor and working classes.  This controversy does not.  The vast majority of Pakistanis are not adequately literate to understand the intricacies of the Chief Justice proceedings.  Even senior PPP leaders remind us that their constituents do not see how this controversy affects the things that matter most to them:  food, shelter, and personal safety.  4.  (C)  THIS IS NOT THE EVENT THAT WILL UNITE THE OPPOSITION:  The PPP is maintaining a low profile and has been at pains to separate itself from the MMA at rallies. Not only does the PPP not want to strengthen the religious parties, it does not want street protests to become violent or spiral out of control, which might in turn bring about a military crack-down.  The PPP worries that widespread violence might lead to a postponement of Benazir Bhutto's return, which is still under negotiation.  5.  (C)  THIS IS NOT AN EVENT THAT HAS CAUSED IRREPARABLE, EXTREME HARM TO MUSHARRAF'S REPUTATION:  The President's quick apology to Geo Television, his agreeing to be interviewed on a Geo program on March 20, and his arranging for the highly-respected Justice Bagwandas to become the new Acting Supreme Court Judge, rather than the initially appointed (and less admired) Javed Iqbal, have helped to curb domestic criticism and prevent extreme political damage. That said, some PPP leaders believe that Musharraf is adequately worried about his reputation that he may seek to renew negotiations that would allow a cooperative PPP/PML-Q arrangement either before or after the next election.  While the PPP initially told us that negotiations were \"off\" because of the Chief Justice controversy, they now tell us they are willing to talk again.   WHAT THIS CONTROVERSY IS -- AS OF NOW  6.  (C)  THE EPISODE IS AN INDICTMENT OF THE PAKISTANI POLICE:  The PML-Q, PPP, and MMA agree on one thing about the next election:  law and order will be a major issue for voters.  The refusal of the police who stormed the Geo television station to take orders from Minister of Information Durrani -- an exchange that was broadcast live -- resonates with poor Pakistanis, who bear the brunt of police corruption.  The government's difficulty assigning blame to senior officials also resonates with Pakistanis.  Ever since a reorganization scheme removed district officials and provincial home secretaries from the police chain of command,  ISLAMABAD 00001329  002 OF 002   authority over the police has resided only with the Minister of Interior in Islamabad.  Observers have noted a marked rise in police misconduct as accountability from civilian authorities has become more distant.  PML leaders tell us they believe the police misconduct issue could hurt them in the election if the government does not act to rein in misbehavior.  7.  (C)  THE DEMONSTRATIONS INDICATE THAT THE POLICE NEED MORE TRAINING:  Lack of riot control skills was painfully clear as police hurled at protesters bricks that had first been thrown at the police.  Additionally, the destruction at Geo television and at lawyers' offices around the country indicates the general lack of professional training and competence in many parts of the police forces.  (Note:  In this vein, Post identified riot control training as an important priority for 2007 Anti-Terrorism Assistance programming.  End Note.)  8.  (C)  EXTERNAL COMMENTARY IS NOT WELCOME:  Both Pakistani Government and opposition contacts have palpably resented public comments by EU officials criticizing the handling of the Chief Justice Affair.  The resentment on both sides has little to do with the merits of the complaints.  Instead, as our contacts remind us, Pakistanis, including elected officials, have been resolving the problem on their own.  The civil society prefers the controversy to focus on its own complaints and accomplishments.  They also note that they are in the best position to produce statements that will prevent the medicine (the protests) from becoming worse than the disease.  9.  (C)  Comment:  Musharraf's initial failure to seek adequate political advice before moving against the Chief Justice could have damaged his and the PML's electoral prospects.  Rapid distancing of the PML from the controversy, coupled with Musharraf's common sense damage control seems to have prevented irreparable harm.  The reputation of the police, though, has clearly suffered a significant (and deserved) blow.  Indeed, this episode is an important reminder of the fundamental importance of our various law enforcement training programs -- and the need to consider expanding those programs to include riot control training.    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1094|07ISLAMABAD298|07ISLAMABAD608", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/24/2007 6:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001331  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PREF, PK, AF SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER ON STATUS OF PAK-AFGHAN JIRGA PLANNING  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1094      B. ISLAMABAD 608      C. ISLAMABAD 298  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: In meetings with Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher on March 15 and with Ambassador on March 19, Interior Minister and Chairman of Pakistan's Jirga Commission Afthab Ahmed Khan Sherpao reviewed the status of the Pak-Afghan jirga process. He described a collegial, cooperative mood at the meetings with the Afghan Jirga Commission March 12-13 in Islamabad, but said that much work remained to prepare for the jirga. The next Jirga Commission meeting will take place April 9-11 in Kabul.  END SUMMARY.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ Good Vibrations at March 12-13 Jirga Commission Bilateral --------------------------------------------- ------------  2. (C) Interor Minister Sherpao told Assistant Secretary Boucher that he had a \"good interaction\" with the Afghan delegation that visited Islamabad for the Jirga Commission meeting March 12-13, emphasizing the \"warm\" atmospherics of the meeting.  He has known Syed Pir Ahmed Gilani, the Chairman of Afghanistan's Jirga Commission, for a long time and was pleased with this \"first people-to-people interaction\" on the jirga.  Sherpao expressed his satisfaction that the Afghan side agreed on the importance of lowering the heat in the Pak-Afghan relationship, building trust and goodwill, and dealing with differences through the jirga process rather than in the press.  Sherpao said the commissions also agreed that the result of the jirgas should be the elimination of terrorism, especially Al Qaeda elements, while addressing the root causes of the problem. Sherpao added that the Afghan side acknowledged Pakistan's efforts in the border areas.  (Note: Sherpao lamented that President Karzai is influenced by others with different opinions. End note.)  Ambassador stressed the current momentum shift that makes this the right time to move forward with jirgas: we are seeing locals' impatience with foreigners in their areas; warmer Pak-Afghan relations; and the arrest campaign against the Taliban.  3. (C) Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri touched on the Jirga Commission meeting during the Ambassador's March 13 farewell call.  Kasuri hoped the commissions would, in addition to planning the jirgas, enhance grassroots links between the two nations.  \"People-to-people exchanges have made a tremendous difference in our relationship with India,\" he said, \"and they should do so for Afghanistan as well.\"  --------------------------------------- Sherpao's Thoughts on Jirga Composition ---------------------------------------  4. (C) Sherpao told Boucher that the March 12-13 discussions focused on the composition of the jirga and its terms of reference.  When Boucher pressed for specifics and deadlines the two sides agreed to, Sherpao equivocated.  He said Pakistan raised no objection to a large jirga with national-level representation, although Pakistan had no experience with that type of jirga.  \"If they want 300 from their side, we can have 300, too,\" he said.  When Boucher asked if Pakistan would only include traditional tribal leaders as representatives, Sherpao said they would invite \"anyone who can help us.\"  Sherpao later told Ambassador he  ISLAMABAD 00001331  002 OF 002   thinks that the participation of prominent political party members and elected officials will bring credibility to the jirga process and will be a blow to those who want to create problems.  5. (C) Sherpao was adamant that outside observers should not attend the grand jirga, explaining that \"for the optics\" this should be seen as the \"will of the people of both sides\" and \"outside presence could dilute the jirga's effectiveness.\"  6. (C) Sherpao also said that Pakistan is not opposed to using smaller joint Pak-Afghan jirgas composed of prominent people with local influence to help quell insurgency in volatile border areas.  Sherpao sees this strategy succeeding if all sides follow up the jirgas with development work. Boucher assured Sherpao that the U.S. government is well-positioned to support these efforts.  -------------------------------- Refugees Remain a Sticking Point --------------------------------  7. (C) Sherpao reiterated to Boucher that the Pakistani government will move to close four Afghan refugee camps this spring.  He cautioned that the Afghan Jirga Commission had asked Pakistan to leave Jalozai camp alone, fearing that those refugees will go to Kabul, where there are not enough jobs to handle the influx.  ------------------------------- Next Steps on Jirga Preparation -------------------------------  8. (C) The next bilateral Jirga Commission meeting will take place April 8-11 in Kabul.  Sherpao told Boucher that Pakistan had committed to bringing a list of proposed jirga participants to Kabul, but he later told Ambassador that the two sides would draw up nomination lists after the April meeting.  9. (C) Sherpao could not give Boucher a definite timeline for when the jirga would take place.  He said the jirga commissions agreed \"they should hurry it up\", but his tone was non-committal.  In a separate meeting, Ambassador urged Sherpao to work expeditiously in order to maximize the jirga's impact against the Taliban, acknowledging that the process is complex and time-consuming.  10. (U) SCA Senior Advisor Caitlin Hayden cleared this cable.   CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1279", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/26/2007 6:47", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001334  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARAFF TO ATTEND ARAB SUMMIT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1279       B. ISLAMABAD 895  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  Most of Pakistan's March 25 papers highlighted Saudi King Abdullah's invitation to President Musharraf to attend the March 28-29 Arab League Summit in Riyadh.  According to the press, this is the first time the Arab League has invited a Pakistani leader to attend a League summit as a participant.  2.  (C)  During Ambassador's March 24 farewell call on Musharraf, the President said he had called Saudi King Abdullah to follow up on the Saudi promise to host a summit of seven moderate Muslim states (reftels).  The King responded by inviting Musharraf to attend and speak at the March 28-29 Arab Summit and asked Musharraf to extend invitations on his behalf to the other three non-Arab states involved in the initiative (Turkey, Indonesia, and Malaysia).  Musharraf said he would use the opportunity to stress the themes of the threat within Islam from extremism and sectarianism and the need for Islamic moderates to take a stand.  Abdullah also told Musharraf they would consult on a date for a summit of the seven. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/26/2007 12:01", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001354  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF ON CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY, FATA, AND JIRGAS   Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1.  (U)  Ambassador paid his farewell call on President Musharraf on March 24.  The meeting was front-page news in most Pakistani papers, with many articles emphasizing Musharraf's promise to \"fight the war on terror to the end.\" The press coverage highlighted the strength of the U.S.-Pakistan strategic relationship; the significant number of Pakistanis studying under the Fulbright program; and Musharraf's promise to address the \"roots of terrorism\" -- an allusion to his Federally Administered Tribal Areas development strategy.  GOVERNMENT INSTIGATING ATTACKS AGAINST FOREIGNERS IN FATA  2.  (C)  Musharraf said he remains fully committed to the war on terror.  Two brigades have completed their deployment to North and South Waziristan as part of the process of asserting government control.  The government has successfully instigated tribesmen against the Uzbeks in South Waziristan, with over 200 killed; Musharraf wants to encourage similar action in North Waziristan and elsewhere. While the government will need to proceed carefully to insure that the population is with the government and against the foreigners, Musharraf stressed that there will be no hesitation in going after al-Qaida targets.  FATA and JIRGAS  3.  (C)  Musharraf expressed appreciation for the Administration's commitment to provide USD 150 million in FY 07 to begin funding Tribal Area development.  Musharraf understood that success with this tranche of money was key to securing additional funding in the out years.  He said Pakistan was working to implement a fully coordinated approach between Islamabad institutions (federal ministries, the military, the parliament) and provincial institutions (the NWFP Governor, the FATA Secretariat, and the FATA Development Authority.)  4.    (C)  Musharraf agreed that the Pak-Afghan jirga process had great potential to improve cross-border cooperation, to improve security conditions,  and to reduce tension between the two countries.  The Ambassador urged that the two sides move quickly to conclude arrangements for a jirga and asked Musharraf to make this a priority.  Musharraf said he would.  CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY  5.  (C)  Musharraf confided that the Government of Pakistan had made a mess of handling corruption accusations against the Chief Justice.  He took personal responsibility for not having developed a \"what if\" plan -- referring, among other things, to the lack of consideration of what would happen if the Chief Justice refused to resign after learning of the reference against him.  Musharraf emphasized that he believed the Chief Justice was corrupt and had damaged judicial institutions.  Something had to be done, he said, though he admitted his government had handled the problem badly.  6.  (C)  Musharraf was personally directing damage control. He had provided very specific orders to the police and other agencies, telling them to  leave the media alone  and not to engage protesters head on.  Musharraf added that the two weeks of incidents had proven that the police needed greater training, discipline, and effective control.  He committed himself to working on those shortcomings.  7.   (C)  Musharraf said he had personally ordered all relevant institutions to allow the Chief Justice unfettered movement around Pakistan.  At the same time, he was working  ISLAMABAD 00001354  002 OF 002   with business leaders to emphasize that allowing the controversy to continue at a fevered pitch would not be in Pakistan's interests.  The President hoped that the PPP also would continue its relatively restrained public posture. (Note:  The Friday Times -- the favored publication of Pakistan's intelligentsia -- this week highlighted the argument that street demonstrations in the Muslim world historically bring Islamist regimes to power, while free elections support moderate democrats.  End Note.)  PERSONNEL CHANGES  8.  (C)  While describing next steps in the controversy, Musharraf concurred with Ambassador that Law Minister Wasi Muhammad Zafar, whose profane rant on VOA had offended many Pakistanis, had exacerbated the Chief Justice controversy. Although he was a \"loyalist,\" Zafar was a liability and Musharraf said he was going to fire him.  Musharraf also would fire the head of the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Agency, whose heavy handed interventions throughout the controversy -- including shutting down Geo television for 20 minutes and demanding that stations remove rolling news tickers about the controversy -- had been both unhelpful and wrong.  9.  (C)  Musharraf offered that, while Information Minister Durrani had been overwhelmed by the crushing international media attention since the controversy began, the President had no plans to remove him. Instead, Pakistan would strengthen the ministry by hiring a professional public relations consultant.  10.  (C)  A discussion of the upcoming Arab League Summit is being reported Septel. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/26/2007 13:02", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001362  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE SUSPENSION PROTESTS SET ON \"SIMMER\" - PPP HEAVYWEIGHTS QUIETLY SEEK DIALOGUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 1329 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) The Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy called for further demonstrations on March 26 to protest Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry's suspension. Turnout was highest in Lahore (septel), where approximately 1,200 Pakistan People's Party,  Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz, and Jamaat-e-Islami representatives protested peacefully. (Note: The Mutahida Majlis-e-Amam coalition of religious parties, of which Jamaat-e-Islami is a member, declared its support for the Alliance's call for protests. End Note.) Islamabad turnout was low: approximately 50 protesters staged a three-hour sit-in at Melody Market. Numbers in Karachi and Peshawar were similarly low.  2. (C) As the Alliance's senior coalition partner, the Pakistan People's Party is participating in the protests, but their hearts do not appear to be in it, keeping the numbers of protesters relatively low. Part of the reason may be the arrest of many party workers. The media reported that Punjab police arrested over 200 opposition leaders and workers over the weekend. Others, one Pakistan People's Party official said, are \"in hiding\" so as not to be arrested.  3. (S-NF) More fundamentally, People's Party leadership is still taking a wait-and-see approach to the Chief Justice controversy. Pakistan People's Party ex-Senator Abdullah Riar brought together National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz and Justice Chaudhry's lead counsel (and People's Party member) Aitzaz Ahsan for an exploratory meeting over the weekend. The result of the meeting, Riar said, was a basic exchange of positions. On March 26, Riar told PolOff that Aitzaz's position was a non-starter, since he was asking the government to withdraw the reference against Justice Chaudhry. The parties left the meeting willing to talk again, however.  4. (S-NF) Comment: The Pakistan People's Party has two reasons to distance itself from the Chief Justice controversy. The publicly discussed reason is that they do not want to hand a victory to the religious parties. More privately, however, they may see the controversy as a way to advance their political agenda. Through its quiet diplomacy and restraining its street power, the Pakistan People's Party may be positioning itself for a potential electoral deal with the Musharraf government. End Comment. CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE36980", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/27/2007 12:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001377  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  GENEVA/CD DEL AND ISN/WILLIAM MALZAHN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/27/2017 TAGS: PK, IN, KNNP, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN WANTS EFFECTIVE VERIFICATION IN P-6 PROPOSAL  REF: STATE 36980  Classified By: Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) On March 26, Deputy Chief of Mission delivered points in reftel to Ministry of Foreign Affairs Additional Secretary for UN Affairs Tariq Osman Hyder.  Hyder responded that Pakistan was firm in its opposition to a negotiating mandate for the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty that did not include a reference to \"international and effective verification.\" Hyder explained that Pakistan supported three of the proposal's suggestions:  ongoing discussion of nuclear disarmament, negative security assurances, and prevention of an outer space arms race.  He further noted that Pakistan was not opposed, in principle, to keeping negotiation of the Fissile Treaty on the Conference's agenda for part II of 2007, but Pakistan would not approve of the P-6 proposal as written because the negotiating mandate for the Treaty was too narrow.  \"It is a matter of resources and national security,\" Hyder said; \"Our country does not have the resources to provide for effective verification on its own, and effective verification is what matters most in this region.\"  Hyder said Pakistan remained committed to the \"Shannon Mandate\" of 1995, which contains the full technical phrase that Pakistan wanted included in the Conference's proposed negotiating mandate for the Treaty.  Pakistan would like the treaty to be \"non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable.\"    CROCKER " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "3/29/2007 11:20", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001417  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/29/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, IN, AF SUBJECT: UPCOMING BALLISTIC MISSILE TEST  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  (S)  Jawad Ali, Assistant Director of the the Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs Disarmament Cell, informed post March 29 that Pakistan would test a surface-to-surface ballistic missile between March 30 and April 3, 2007.  The anticipated trajectory is over Pakistani territory only.  Per previous agreements, Pakistan has informed the governments of India, Afghanistan, and China.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE1569", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/2/2007 12:26", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 001451  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  EMBASSY AMMAN FOR JOSEPH C. IRVINE ISN/ECC FOR CASSADY CRAFT AND VENNIE PIKOULAS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, KNNP SUBJECT: PAKISTANI PARTICIPANTS IN AMMAN PROLIFERATION AWARENESS TRAINING  REF: A. STATE 1569      B. WEST-CRAFT EMAILS  1.  The Government of Pakistan warmly welcomes the invitation of the United States to participate in the Proliferation Awareness Training taking place in Amman, Jordan, April 16-18.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has selected the following 9 individuals to participate:  1.  Jawad Ali, Assistant Director (Disarmament), Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2.  Massood ul Hasan Qureshi, Deputy Chief of Exports, Ministry of Commerce 3.  Abdul Shakoor, Scientific Officer, Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Agency 4.  Arshad Rashid Bhatti, Deputy Chief, Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission 5.  Abdul Hafeez Chaudhry, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Industries, Production and Special Initiatives 6.  Capt Raashid Bashir Mazari, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Interior 7.  Cdr. Syed Ahmed Ovais Hyder Zaidi, Maritime Security Agency 8.  Khalid Mehmood, Collector (Exports), Central Board of Revenue 9.  Col Muhammad Khurshid Khan, Strategic Planning Directorate  2.  Embassy Islamabad point of contact is PolOff Tom West (westtw@state.gov and 051-208-2294).  Post would appreciate receiving fund cite information from Washington to purchase plane tickets soonest.  Thank you.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/2/2007 14:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001456  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  The Supreme Judicial Council deciding the fate of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry is scheduled to meet again on April 3.  Islamabad police are planning for a possibly large demonstration that day, but public interest in the Chief Justice controversy has declined markedly during the last week.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  During an April 1 meeting with Codel Tierney, Aitzaz Ahsan, lead counsel for \"non-functioning\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, updated the Codel on proceedings against his client.  At the April 3 meeting of the Supreme Judicial Council, Aitzaz will present three petitions asking the Council to:  1.)  End the in-camera nature of the proceedings;  2.)  Dismiss at least three judges from the Council because of known conflicts of interest and/or personal enmity of the Chief Justice; and 3.) Dismiss the Council altogether because there is no constitutional mandate for a Supreme Judicial Council not headed by the Chief Justice.  (Note:  According to Aitzaz, under the constitution, only the Chief Justice can chair a Supreme Judicial Council.  No constitutional alternative exists if the Chief Justice himself is the subject of the Council's inquiry.  Aitzaz claims the proper way to deal with a Chief Justice accused of malfeasance or misconduct is an impeachment trial by the entire Supreme Court, not a Supreme Judicial Council.  Aitzaz plans to cite American practice as a precedent:  according to Aitzaz, the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court is never able to recuse himself from a case.  When he is aware of a conflict of interest, he does not participate in the debate or vote, but he still acts as Chief Justice, leading the Court on the matter.  End Note.)  3.  On April 2, Attorney Zafarullah Khan filed a petition with the Supreme Court arguing that the proceedings against the Chief Justice were unconstitutional for a variety of procedural and constitutional reasons.  The Court agreed to hear his petition -- along with two other similar petitions -- on April 11, but refused to suspend the Supreme Judicial Council until then.  The Court also agreed to hear another petition claiming that Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas cannot serve as Acting Chief Justice because he is a Hindu.  The court will hear that petition on April 4. (Note:  While it is true that the Chief Justice normally also serves as Chief of the Shariat Court, legal experts tell us there is no constitutional requirement for the Chief Justice to be a Muslim -- the Chief Justice can simply appoint a surrogate to head the Shariat Court. End Note.)  4.  Aitzaz reports that the demonstration planned for the street in front of the Supreme Court on April 3 will draw \"a large crowd\", despite this week's major PPP rally in Larkana, the ancestral home of the Bhuttos. The PPP expects about half a million of the faithful to attend the Sindh rally, which memorializes the hanging of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.  5.  (C)  Comment:  While still an occasional topic of conversation among the elites, general interest in the Chief Justice controversy has dramatically declined over the last week. The one event that could reignite public passion would be if related protest marches became violent.  We continue to encourage both the government and demonstrators to show restraint and to eschew violence.  End Comment   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1456", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/3/2007 14:35", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 001466  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE: MINOR PROTESTS THROUGHOUT PAKISTAN  REF: ISLAMABAD 01456  (SBU) The Supreme Judicial Council deciding the fate of \"non-functional\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry met on April 3 and then adjourned until April 13.  Embassy locally engaged staff reported that up to 1,500 protesters, mostly lawyers and political party activists, turned out on Islamabad's Constitution Avenue to protest the government's action against the Chief Justice. In Lahore, close to 1,500 Jama'at Islami party members marched peacefully down the mall to the Punjab High Court, where party leaders Liaqat Baloch and Hafiz Salman Butt gave speeches.  Protests were smaller in Peshawar (150-200 people), Karachi (400-500 people), and Quetta (200-300 people). Today's protests did not dominate the morning's papers or the day's TV coverage in Pakistan; news of tribes declaring \"jihad\" against Uzbeks in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Prime Minister Aziz' participation in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Summit in Delhi garnered equal or more attention. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1466", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/4/2007 15:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001490  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/04/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE:  THE COURTROOM AND THE STREET  REF: ISLAMABAD 01466  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) The bulk of the April 3 session of the Supreme Judicial Council proceedings against non-functioning Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry involved a debate over the in camera nature of the Council.  (The Chief Justice wants public proceedings; the government wants them closed.) In a conversation with Embassy staff on April 4, one of Chaudhry's lawyers predicted that Chaudhry and the government might eventually reach a compromise that would make some sessions of the Council public, others in camera.  As reported reftel, the Council adjourned until April 13.  2.  (C) Breathless reporting in some Western news outlets notwithstanding, the atmosphere outside the courtroom April 3 was generally peaceful and, according to several Embassy observers, \"fair-like.\"  Many protesters brought lunches and posed in groups for the cameras.  A few hundred Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz and People's Party Parliamentarian members shook hands before shouting at one another, while the better-represented religious parties (about 1,500 in number) made good use of a platform and megaphones.  (Note:  The Jama'at Islami party dominated protests in all major cities yesterday, reflecting their relative advantage in organizational discipline over the mainstream parties.  End Note.)  A notable exception to the calm, however, occurred when protesting lawyers roughed up two attorneys for the government, Khalid Ranjha and Arif Chaudhry, as they left the Supreme Court.  Ranjha, in fact, withdrew from the government's legal team after the incident, leaving the government searching for equally prominent representation. (Note:  The Attorney General, himself a fine lawyer, is technically the lead attorney for the government but is not handling the day-to-day legal work.  End Note.)  3.  (C) Comment:  Barring an unforeseen outbreak in serious street violence, the peak in this controversy seems to have passed.  Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas' steady and credible stewardship of the Supreme Judicial Council, coupled with this complicated legal issue's lack of resonance among the general public, has pushed this story away from the front of the news cycle in Pakistan.  Indeed, Prime Minister Aziz' 5-point roadmap for the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation received as much press coverage on April 4 as the Chief Justice issue.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1514", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/5/2007 14:47", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001514  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2017 TAGS: IN, MNUC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTANI PRESSURE ON IRAN  Classified By: Charge d'Affairs a.i. Peter Bodde. Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  FOLLOWING, ORIGINALLY ISLAMABAD 1279 DATED 20 MARCH 2007, BEING RESENT AT YOUR REQUEST.  APOLOGIES FOR NOT LISTING YOU AS AN ADRESSEE INITIALLY.  1.  (C)  President Musharraf, Foreign Minister Kasuri, and Foreign Secretary Khan have all recently emphasized to Ambassador that one purpose of Pakistan's \"Moderate Muslim States\" initiative is to pressure Iran to modify its behavior.  Pakistan believes that by not inviting Iran to the February 24 meeting of Muslim Foreign Ministers in Islamabad, the other participants (Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia) have made clear that Tehran must moderate its policies on nuclear development and foreign relations and that it should adopt the Beirut Declaration on the Israel-Palestinian conflict.  Foreign Minister Kasuri says he has told Iranian Foreign Minister Mottaki that Iran must change its unrealistic and destabilizing stances toward Israel, the U.S., and nuclear issues.  Kasuri reports that Iran is flexible on some issues, \"but it absolutely will not break ranks on nuclear enrichment.\"  2.  (C)  President Musharraf visited Tehran in February as part of his outreach to Muslim nations.  According to Khan, Musharraf met with Ahmedinejad to explain the broad parameters of his initiative and to \"clearly convey concerns that Iranian confrontation (with the U.S. and the West) must be prevented.\"  Ahmedinejad responded that Iran was not responsible for tensions.  He also denied Iran was supporting sectarianism in Iraq.  3.  (C)  Musharraf told the Ambassador that, in a phone conversation following the Islamabad Ministerial, Ahmedinejad expressed unhappiness over Iran's exclusion.  Musharraf said he responded that a common point of departure for the seven participating states was the 2002 Beirut Summit Declaration on a two state solution to the Palestinian issue, which Iran rejects.  He said he urged Ahmedinejad to reconsider Iran's position.  Kasuri told the Ambassador separately that the Pakistani Ambassador in Tehran was called in to receive a complaint about the ministerial. The Iranian Ambassador in Islamabad delivered the same complaint.  Kasuri said the Ambassadors received the same reply as Musharraf gave Ahmedinejad.  4.  (C)  Foreign Minister Kasuri and Foreign Secretary Khan recently told Ambassador that Pakistan's initiative was probably one motivator spurring Iran to visit Saudi Arabia in early March.  (Comment:  The connection between the Musharraf initiative and the Ahmedinejad trip to Mecca could take two forms:  The Iranian President may have wanted to convince the Saudis not to cooperate with the Pakistanis; or he may have been trying to prove that he is not averse to dialogue.  End Comment.)  ------------------------------------- Aman 07:  Another Message -------------------------------------  5.  (C)  Pakistani leaders have intimated that one purpose of the recent Aman 07 Naval Exercise was to demonstrate to Iran that the U.S., Pakistan, China, and other countries are able to cooperate militarily.  Mission's Defense Attache's Office and the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan have confirmed that Iran did not/not participate as observers in Aman '07 and that reporting in other channels claiming that Pakistan invited Iran to observe the exercise is inaccurate.  --------------------------------------------- --------------- Moderate Muslim States Initiative:  Its Genesis --------------------------------------------- ----------------  6.  (C)  In a March 16 meeting, Foreign Secretary Khan explained to Ambassador the roots of Musharraf's initiative. He said that various recent visitors to Islamabad, including the King of Jordan, had told Musharraf that like-minded nations should find a way to combat the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.  Khan reported that naysayers, particularly in the Foreign Ministry, warned the President against involving Pakistan in the labyrinth of Middle East problems.  Musharraf countered doubters by asking them four questions: --Is the situation in the Middle East not deteriorating? --Is Pakistan not involved or effected? --If the situation implodes -- e.g. in Iran -- would it not have disastrous consequences on Pakistan? --So should we stand still with folded hands?  7.  (C)  According to Khan, Musharraf began his initiative by contacting Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria.  (Note: Pakistan ultimately excluded Syria from the February Foreign Ministers' meeting because Syria was not adequately committed  ISLAMABAD 00001514  002 OF 002   to playing a helpful role in the Middle East.  End Note.) The original countries agreed on broad parameters on two main issues:  the need for a specific timeline for the establishment of a Palestinian state; and the need to play a constructive role in tamping down sectarian tensions in Iraq.  8.  (C)  Khan said that, at the February 24 meeting of Foreign Ministers from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Indonesia and Malaysia, countries were reluctant to \"push Iran\" and Arab representatives seemed uncomfortable over non-Arab countries involving themselves in Middle East issues.  Musharraf responded that, if Muslim countries were serious about resolving Iraq and the Palestinian question, participants should put their reservations aside. Ultimately, all seven Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement viewing \"with deep distress the conflict in Iraq,\" worrying that sectarian tensions would spill across Iraq's borders, and decrying a \"festering\" Palestinian dispute, violence in Lebanon, and rising tensions over Iran's nuclear program.  (Ref A).  9.  (C)  Comment:  In two important ways, Musharraf's moderate Muslim states initiative has already been a success.  It has brought together key foreign ministers, including those from Saudi Arabia and Egypt, on relatively short notice; and it has made Iran uncomfortable.  Musharraf's initiative creates an interesting, unplanned synergy with the UNSC resolution and the Iraq neighboring states initiative. The three actions together provide both incentives and negative consequences to encourage Iran to moderate its behavior.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2007 3:12", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 001515  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF MEETS WITH CODELS REYES AND TIERNEY  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (U)  Codel Reyes -- Congressman Silvestre Reyes (D-TX); Congressman Rush Holt (D-NJ); and Congressman Darrel Issa (R-CA) -- and Codel Tierney -- Congressman John Tierney (D-MA); Congresswoman Betty McCollum (D-MN); Congressman George Miller (D-CA); and Congressman Patrick McHenry (R-NC) -- called on President Musharraf on April 3.  FIGHTING THE TALIBAN AND AQ  2.  (S/NF)  Answering a question from Congressman Tierney, Musharraf acknowledged that the Taliban were active on the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and that al Qaeda was operating in North and South Waziristan and in Bajaur.  The President explained that the population of the Waziristans was less than one percent of the entire population of Pakistan, and that the Waziristans were the most remote part of the country.  He also noted that Zawahiri and Osama bin Laden were probably in a remote area of Bajaur or across the border in Afghanistan staying with Hekmatyar sympathizers.  Several times during the meeting, Musharraf stressed his commitment to working with the U.S. to find both men.  3.  (S/NF)  Musharraf was frustrated by Western and Afghan criticism of Pakistan's efforts on the Afghan border.  He reviewed some of the challenges to securing the border, including high mountains and almost no road network.  In an attempt to address some of those challenges, Pakistan was fencing some parts of the border and was reinforcing military operations in the region.  4.  (C)  Musharraf complained that some Western commentators seemed to think that the Taliban were generally Pakistani, or that the core of the Taliban's support was in Pakistan. Musharraf noted that the militants fighting the Coalition were largely Afghans, and that the Taliban's strength was in Afghanistan.  He reminded the representatives that, during the 1990s, Mullah Omar and the Taliban had controlled 90 percent of Afghanistan.  He said that the same Taliban elements who had defeated Turks, Uzbeks, and other Northern Alliance members were still in Afghanistan and were the core of the forces fighting the Coalition.  He said that even if Taliban militants were not crossing from Pakistan, Afghan Pashtuns who had supported and fought with the Taliban through the 1990s would be fighting against the Coalition.  5.  (S/NF)  Musharraf acknowledged that Taliban militants had sympathizers in Pakistan who were hiding them, providing medical help, and supporting them in other ways.  Pakistan was committed to choking off support from Pakistan to the Taliban.  He particularly mentioned shutting down training camps for suicide bombers.  That said, Musharraf emphasized that ISAF had to root out the core of the Taliban in Afghanistan.  RECENT ANTI-MILITANT ACTIONS  6.  (S/NF)  According to Musharraf, the Government had been encouraging schisms between foreigners living in FATA and the local population.  As a result, local tribesmen had so far killed 250 Uzbeks in South Waziristan.  The government was providing clandestine support to the locals, including artillery fire. A large group of Uzbeks were trapped on a ridge near Wana, surrounded by local militias, according to the President.  7.  (S/NF)  Musharraf reported that the government was working to create enmity between locals and foreigners in North Waziristan.  \"I think Al Qaeda will be on the run. They are already on the run,\" said the President.  8.  (S/NF)  The President noted that the Pakistan Military recently re-deployed two brigades from the Indian border to the Waziristans, including into the Mir Ali area, where he said \"big wigs\" were hiding.  He said the Pakistan Military had \"sealed off\" Mir Ali.   ISLAMABAD 00001515  002 OF 003   FATA POLITICAL AGREEMENTS  9.  (C)  Musharraf admitted the North Waziristan jirga agreement had, so far, been 30-50 percent successful.  He said that implementation difficulties did not necessarily mean the agreement had been a bad one.  \"Military action will not work,\" he noted, stressing the need for political solutions as part of an overall strategy.  No agreement would provide 100 percent results, but that truth was not a reason to dispense with political agreements. According to the President, the government was continuing to appeal to Pashtun honor in upholding the agreement.  He believed the appeal to honor would eventually bear greater fruit.  10.  (C)  On the recently reported Bajaur undertaking, Musharraf stressed that Bajaur elders had approached the government with an offer or \"undertaking\" to attempt to control militant activity, not the other way around.  He believed the efforts of the elders were a good sign and should be considered.  TALIBAN IN QUETTA  11. (S/NF)  Congressman Tierney asked about the security situation in Quetta.  Musharraf explained that, of four important Taliban commanders, three were Afghans who moved back and forth across the border.  He believed Mullah Omar had not been in Pakistan since he was a teenager.  Musharraf reported that U.S. and Pakistani intelligence agencies were tracking Mullah Omar, along with Dadullah Lang and Haqqani. The one Pakistani militant leader -- Baitullah Mehsud -- was in South Waziristan.  He said that Baitullah Mehsud was encouraging suicide attacks, including against Pakistan military targets.  \"We must get him.  We will get him,\" promised Musharraf.  AFGHAN REFUGEES  12.  (C)  Musharraf said that there were no \"local\" Taliban in Balochistan.  He said the Taliban there were all Afghan refugees.  The refugee camps were a continuing security problem, noted Musharraf.  He emphasized Pakistan's desire to close camps and to encourage refugees to repatriate.  FATA DEVELOPMENT  13.  (C)  Musharraf reported that his government had already provided USD 100 million for FATA development.  He said he was working to strengthen political agents and the FATA Development Authority in order to enable further development efforts.  He was also working on improving the capacity of the Frontier Corps and the Levies (tribal police) to support the political agents.  EXTREMISM  14.  (C)  Musharraf described Pakistan's political future as a tussle between moderates and extremists.  He was convinced the \"people\" -- particularly the rural masses who made up 60 percent of Pakistan's population and with whom Western observers seldom interacted -- would defeat extremism.  He predicted that in the next election, moderate parties would prevail throughout Pakistan, including in the NWFP and Balochistan.  (Note:  The religious parties currently control the NWFP government and are part of the ruling coalition in Balochistan.  End Note.)  Musharraf explained that religious parties had done better than expected in the last election because of public sentiment against the U.S. actions in Afghanistan, but that the NWFP and Balochistan populations were disenchanted with the actions of the religious parties since they assumed power.  ELECTIONS  15.  (C)  In responding to a question from Congressman Miller, Musharraf promised that the coming general election would be fair and \"totally transparent.\"  Musharraf cautioned the codels not to confuse partisan campaign tactics with  ISLAMABAD 00001515  003 OF 003   factual complaints about the election system.  While it was true that both his supporters and detractors were complaining about names being struck off the voter roles, the voter registration project was designed to end historic patterns of fraud, where some people would have 10 identification cards and vote 10 times.  He said the government had already issued 50 million new fraud-proof identification cards, and that anyone with a card could appear at any election commission site to register to vote.  DEMOCRACY  16.  (C)  Democracy was more than just elections, said Musharraf.  He had introduced true democracy to Pakistan by establishing democratically elected local governance systems that gave the population experience in representative democracy.  He had created guaranteed women's seats at the local council and National Assembly level, and had guaranteed religious minority representation at numbers greater than their percentage of the population.  In 1999, Pakistan offered one television channel; today, the population could access 43 stations.  The press, he noted, was free.  17.  (C)  He had created an independent election commission and had invited all political parties to nominate commissioners.  The opposition had failed to nominate anyone.  He had created a National Security Council including provincial, national, and senior military representatives to encourage healthier cooperation between civilians and the military and to try to prevent the kinds of stresses that have led in the past to coups d'etat.  18.  (C)  Musharraf agreed with several members of Congress that Pakistani political parties lacked internal democracy. He said he had tried to encourage more democratic structures in political parties, but noted he had not met with success. When asked about the potential return of Benazir Bhutto or Nawaz Sharif, Musharraf demurred.  THE UNIFORM  19.  (C)  Answering pointed questions about whether he would remove his uniform before the next election, the President responded that he would make a final decision on the issue closer to the election.  That said, Musharraf emphasized that the electoral assembly would vote freely on who would be the next President whether or not he was wearing his uniform. Musharraf also explained that his uniform had allowed him to ensure prompt reaction to the earthquake; had enabled military action in FATA; and expedited military responses to infrastructure emergencies like failed bridges. Historically, he said, civilian governments had much slower and more cumbersome responses from the military.     BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1490", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2007 3:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001516  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/05/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: OFFICIALS INDICTED FOR MANHANDLING CHIEF JUSTICE  REF: ISLAMABAD 1490  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (U) On April 3, the Supreme Court indicted seven senior government and police officials on charges of contempt of court for their March 13 manhandling of non-functioning Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry. A three-member bench of Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas, Justice Jillani, and Justice Mulk issued the indictments, citing gross manhandling and disrespectful acts toward the Chief Justice. Deputy Attorney General Raja Muhammad Irshad, on behalf of the State, argued in favor of the indictments.  2. (U) The indicted officials have until April 11 to sumbit their replies to the court. If convicted, the officials could be sentenced to six months imprisonment and termination of government employment. The indicted individuals include Islamabad Chief Commissioner and the Inspector General of Police.  3. (C) Comment: The images of police grabbing the Chief Justice by the hair and forcing him into a vehicle made a strong impact on the legal community, and the Supreme Court wasted no time in ordering a full inquiry into the incident. Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas' quick response may help build confidence among lawyers and other members of civil society that he will carry out the Supreme Judicial Council process fairly and independently. End Comment.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/6/2007 3:14", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 001517  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF MEETS WITH CODELS REYES AND TIERNEY  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (U)  Codel Reyes -- Congressman Silvestre Reyes (D-TX); Congressman Rush Holt (D-NJ); and Congressman Darrel Issa (R-CA) -- and Codel Tierney -- Congressman John Tierney (D-MA); Congresswoman Betty McCollum (D-MN); Congressman George Miller (D-CA); and Congressman Patrick McHenry (R-NC) -- called on President Musharraf on April 3.  FIGHTING THE TALIBAN AND AQ  2.  (S/NF)  Answering a question from Congressman Tierney, Musharraf acknowledged that the Taliban were active on the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and that al Qaeda was operating in North and South Waziristan and in Bajaur.  The President explained that the population of the Waziristans was less than one percent of the entire population of Pakistan, and that the Waziristans were the most remote part of the country.  He also noted that Zawahiri and Osama bin Laden were probably in a remote area of Bajaur or across the border in Afghanistan staying with Hekmatyar sympathizers.  Several times during the meeting, Musharraf stressed his commitment to working with the U.S. to find both men.  3.  (S/NF)  Musharraf was frustrated by Western and Afghan criticism of Pakistan's efforts on the Afghan border.  He reviewed some of the challenges to securing the border, including high mountains and almost no road network.  In an attempt to address some of those challenges, Pakistan was fencing some parts of the border and was reinforcing military operations in the region.  4.  (C)  Musharraf complained that some Western commentators seemed to think that the Taliban were generally Pakistani, or that the core of the Taliban's support was in Pakistan. Musharraf noted that the militants fighting the Coalition were largely Afghans, and that the Taliban's strength was in Afghanistan.  He reminded the representatives that, during the 1990s, Mullah Omar and the Taliban had controlled 90 percent of Afghanistan.  He said that the same Taliban elements who had defeated Turks, Uzbeks, and other Northern Alliance members were still in Afghanistan and were the core of the forces fighting the Coalition.  He said that even if Taliban militants were not crossing from Pakistan, Afghan Pashtuns who had supported and fought with the Taliban through the 1990s would be fighting against the Coalition.  5.  (S/NF)  Musharraf acknowledged that Taliban militants had sympathizers in Pakistan who were hiding them, providing medical help, and supporting them in other ways.  Pakistan was committed to choking off support from Pakistan to the Taliban.  He particularly mentioned shutting down training camps for suicide bombers.  That said, Musharraf emphasized that ISAF had to root out the core of the Taliban in Afghanistan.  RECENT ANTI-MILITANT ACTIONS  6.  (S/NF)  According to Musharraf, the Government had been encouraging schisms between foreigners living in FATA and the local population.  As a result, local tribesmen had so far killed 250 Uzbeks in South Waziristan.  The government was providing clandestine support to the locals, including artillery fire. A large group of Uzbeks were trapped on a ridge near Wana, surrounded by local militias, according to the President.  7.  (S/NF)  Musharraf reported that the government was working to create enmity between locals and foreigners in North Waziristan.  \"I think Al Qaeda will be on the run. They are already on the run,\" said the President.  ISLAMABAD 00001517  002 OF 004    8.  (S/NF)  The President noted that the Pakistan Military recently re-deployed two brigades from the Indian border to the Waziristans, including into the Mir Ali area, where he said \"big wigs\" were hiding.  He said the Pakistan Military had \"sealed off\" Mir Ali.  FATA POLITICAL AGREEMENTS  9.  (C)  Musharraf admitted the North Waziristan jirga agreement had, so far, been 30-50 percent successful.  He said that implementation difficulties did not necessarily mean the agreement had been a bad one.  \"Military action will not work,\" he noted, stressing the need for political solutions as part of an overall strategy.  No agreement would provide 100 percent results, but that truth was not a reason to dispense with political agreements. According to the President, the government was continuing to appeal to Pashtun honor in upholding the agreement.  He believed the appeal to honor would eventually bear greater fruit.  10.  (C)  On the recently reported Bajaur undertaking, Musharraf stressed that Bajaur elders had approached the government with an offer or \"undertaking\" to attempt to control militant activity, not the other way around.  He believed the efforts of the elders were a good sign and should be considered.  TALIBAN IN QUETTA  11. (S/NF)  Congressman Tierney asked about the security situation in Quetta.  Musharraf explained that, of four important Taliban commanders, three were Afghans who moved back and forth across the border.  He believed Mullah Omar had not been in Pakistan since he was a teenager.  Musharraf reported that U.S. and Pakistani intelligence agencies were tracking Mullah Omar, along with Dadullah Lang and Haqqani. The one Pakistani militant leader -- Baitullah Mehsud -- was in South Waziristan.  He said that Baitullah Mehsud was encouraging suicide attacks, including against Pakistan military targets.  \"We must get him.  We will get him,\" promised Musharraf.  AFGHAN REFUGEES  12.  (C)  Musharraf said that there were no \"local\" Taliban in Balochistan.  He said the Taliban there were all Afghan refugees.  The refugee camps were a continuing security problem, noted Musharraf.  He emphasized Pakistan's desire to close camps and to encourage refugees to repatriate.  FATA DEVELOPMENT  13.  (C)  Musharraf reported that his government had already provided USD 100 million for FATA development.  He said he was working to strengthen political agents and the FATA Development Authority in order to enable further development efforts.  He was also working on improving the capacity of the Frontier Corps and the Levies (tribal police) to support the political agents.  EXTREMISM  14.  (C)  Musharraf described Pakistan's political future as a tussle between moderates and extremists.  He was convinced the \"people\" -- particularly the rural masses who made up 60 percent of Pakistan's population and with whom Western observers seldom interacted -- would defeat extremism.  He predicted that in the next election, moderate parties would prevail throughout Pakistan, including in the NWFP and Balochistan.  (Note:  The religious parties currently control  ISLAMABAD 00001517  003 OF 004   the NWFP government and are part of the ruling coalition in Balochistan.  End Note.)  Musharraf explained that religious parties had done better than expected in the last election because of public sentiment against the U.S. actions in Afghanistan, but that the NWFP and Balochistan populations were disenchanted with the actions of the religious parties since they assumed power.  ELECTIONS  15.  (C)  In responding to a question from Congressman Miller, Musharraf promised that the coming general election would be fair and \"totally transparent.\"  Musharraf cautioned the codels not to confuse partisan campaign tactics with factual complaints about the election system.  While it was true that both his supporters and detractors were complaining about names being struck off the voter roles, the voter registration project was designed to end historic patterns of fraud, where some people would have 10 identification cards and vote 10 times.  He said the government had already issued 50 million new fraud-proof identification cards, and that anyone with a card could appear at any election commission site to register to vote.  DEMOCRACY  16.  (C)  Democracy was more than just elections, said Musharraf.  He had introduced true democracy to Pakistan by establishing democratically elected local governance systems that gave the population experience in representative democracy.  He had created guaranteed women's seats at the local council and National Assembly level, and had guaranteed religious minority representation at numbers greater than their percentage of the population.  In 1999, Pakistan offered one television channel; today, the population could access 43 stations.  The press, he noted, was free.  17.  (C)  He had created an independent election commission and had invited all political parties to nominate commissioners.  The opposition had failed to nominate anyone.  He had created a National Security Council including provincial, national, and senior military representatives to encourage healthier cooperation between civilians and the military and to try to prevent the kinds of stresses that have led in the past to coups d'etat.  18.  (C)  Musharraf agreed with several members of Congress that Pakistani political parties lacked internal democracy. He said he had tried to encourage more democratic structures in political parties, but noted he had not met with success. When asked about the potential return of Benazir Bhutto or Nawaz Sharif, Musharraf demurred.  THE UNIFORM  19.  (C)  Answering pointed questions about whether he would remove his uniform before the next election, the President responded that he would make a final decision on the issue closer to the election.  That said, Musharraf emphasized that the electoral assembly would vote freely on who would be the next President whether or not he was wearing his uniform. Musharraf also explained that his uniform had allowed him to ensure prompt reaction to the earthquake; had enabled military action in FATA; and expedited military responses to infrastructure emergencies like failed bridges. Historically, he said, civilian governments had much slower and more cumbersome responses from the military.      ISLAMABAD 00001517  004 OF 004   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/10/2007 8:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 001570  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF MEETS WITH COMMANDER USCENTCOM   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1. (C)  SUMMARY:  New U.S. Central Command Commander, Admiral William J. Fallon, met March 31 with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf.  They discussed Musharraf,s participation at the recent Arab League Summit (disappointing), Musharraf's interest in engaging on Israeli-Palestinian peace efforts (as a go-between), his efforts to construct an alliance of moderate Muslim states (slow going), the situation in Iraq (Sunnis need to be given more), continuing concerns about Iran (too unpredictable), and the status of Pakistan-Afghanistan relations and a plea for better understanding of Pakistan,s perspective (can,t trust President Karzai).  Admiral Fallon explored with Musharraf ways that the Government of Pakistan could improve security control and economic prosperity in the FATA and adjacent areas.  Throughout the lengthy and substantive discussion, President Musharraf was relaxed and in command of the issues and only becomae highly animated when the talk turned to Afghanistan and the Pakistani media.  END SUMMARY.   Moderate Muslim States Initiative  2.  (C)  On March 31, Admiral William J. Fallon, Commander USCENTCOM, paid his inaugural call on Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf.  Musharraf opened by explaining his Moderate Muslim States Initiative to the Commander.  (Note: Pakistan's Moderate Muslim States Initiative, in which like-minded nations work together toward defusing tensions in Israel/Palestine, Lebanon, and Iraq, includes Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, Malaysia, and Indonesia.  End Note.) Musharraf said the Israel/Palestinian impasse was the \"core problem\" facing the Muslim world, including Pakistan.  The participation of Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Egypt in the Moderate Muslim States Initiative notwithstanding, the President was not convinced that Arab states fully recognized the degree to which problems in the Middle East impacted non-Arab Muslim countries.  Some Arab states also failed to take Israel's needs and interests into account, exacerbating the problem, according to Musharraf.  The President noted a need to encourage Israeli flexibility.  He said that Muslim states, both Arab and non-Arab, should unite to seek a solution to the Palestinian question; Pakistan could play a role in working on the issue.  He offered that Saudi King Abdullah would soon call a summit of the moderate Muslim states to discuss issues of concern, including the Palestinian question.  Admiral Fallon agreed on the importance of Islamic unity to work toward real solutions to various problems.  3. (C)  Musharraf believed more Muslim countries should be engaged in calming Iraq to help prevent sectarian tensions from spilling over into other countries.  In particular, Syria should mend its ways and join the group of countries that are part of the solution, not part of the problem.  In order for various interrelated Middle Eastern problems to be resolved, an agreement on the Golan Heights was crucial and a good reason to maintain dialogue with Syria.  4.  (C)  The Admiral said the support of Iraq's neighbors for President Maliki and his government would contribute importantly to strengthening Iraqi self-confidence and to helping Maliki and his government face the difficult challenges ahead.  Musharraf said  Maliki needed to  show more resolve and courage. Iraqis must develop a political solution to current problems, which he suspected would involve a unified but highly decentralized Iraqi state.  He added that Sunnis needed to be assured with \"guarantees\" on their key concerns.  He warned feelingly against over-strengthening the Shias, which he said would ultimately benefited Iran.  ISLAMABAD 00001570  002 OF 003    Iran  5. (C)  Musharraf said he spoke with the Iranian Foreign Minister at the Arab League Summit in Riyadh two days earlier and urged him to resolve the crisis over the British naval personnel immediately.  Musharraf counseled the Iranian FM that Iran should, in general, \"avoid confrontations.\"  Pakistan and the Taliban  6.  (C)  Musharraf launched into an explanation \"to correct misperceptions\" about Pakistan's role in the Afghanistan conflict.  He said that blaming only Pakistan for problems in Afghanistan was counterproductive, as well as wrong.  The Government of Afghanistan's negative attitude toward Pakistan and its public criticism of Pakistan's efforts against the Taliban were \"demotivating.\"  He wanted President Karzai to pay more attention to the substance of the problem (which he thought was largely Pashtun disillusionment with the status quo) and less to \"optics\" like bashing Pakistan.  He believed the Government of Afghanistan needed to offer the Pashtuns more \"carrots\" to balance the necessary security measures taken against militants.  7. (C)  Musharraf reported that Pakistan's efforts against militants operating out of Pakistan were going well. Pakistan had isolated many of the foreign fighters, and the rules of engagement of Pakistan,s military did not restrict it in any way from actions against militant targets.  Musharraf reported that local tribal groups were making progress in their fight to remove foreigners (Uzbeks) from South Waziristan.  He underscored his commitment to \"choke off\" support from Pakistan to Taliban elements in Afghanistan.  8.  (C)  The President stressed that some press reports of a new Bajaur political agreement were incorrect.  Bajaur tribal leaders had approached government representatives with an \"undertaking\" that would promise various actions against militant activity.  The government had not signed the agreement, despite press reports to the contrary.  9.  (C)  Musharraf explained that part of his plan to control the movement of Taliban forces was to emplace fences at two parts of the border that funnel personnel and materiel into Afghanistan.  (He did not rule out the possibility of adding additional fences if these proved successful.)  Another component of his plan was to provide development assistance in the FATA.  Specifically, Musharraf said that political agents and other civil representatives needed quick access to funds to provide high-impact development projects.  Pakistan and Extremism  10.  (C)  Musharraf described the situation in Pakistan as \"complex\".  The extremism pendulum -- which had swung far to the right under Zia -- was now swinging in the other direction, in his view.  The President stressed the importance of a long-term strategy and expressed disappointment with international media articles that focused on short-term problems rather than long-term goals.  Pakistan had embarked on a social development strategy that could be modified as needed; other countries should allow Pakistan to be flexible as it implementsed its strategy.  11.  (C)  Musharraf predicted that moderate democrats in Pakistan would be victorious in the next general election -- a defeat for extremists.  He suggested that the religious parties' percentage of the vote would drop from 18 percent in the previous election to around 5 percent in the next.  He described recent reforms to Pakistani textbooks and curricula as important in the fight against extremism.  Registering  ISLAMABAD 00001570  003 OF 003   madrassahs and cracking down on foreign students attending those madrassahs were also helping, and the passage of the Women's Protection Bill had been another significant signal that Musharraf's government was committed to rolling back fundamentalist Islam in Pakistan.  The President said he looked forward to further legislation protecting the rights of women.  Economy  12.  (C)  Musharraf asserted that economic development was key to defeating extremism.  He stressed the importance of maintaining economic growth and encouraging foreign investment.  Chief Justice Controversy  13.  (C)  Musharaff described the Chief Justice as a \"complicated man\" with a large ego.  He accused the justice of nepotism and other acts of favoritism and stressed that the actions he had taken against the justice were completely constitutional.  That said, he admitted his government's tactics in the early days of the controversy made the situation difficult.  14.  (U)  Admiral Fallon reviewed and cleared this cable. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1517", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/10/2007 12:27", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 001583  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MOPS, PK, AF, IZ, IR, ID, MY, SA, LE SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF TELLS MCCAIN: DON'T PULL OUT OF IRAQ WITHOUT TRIPARTITE POLITICAL SETTLEMENT  REF: ISLAMABAD 1517  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) On April 3, President Musharraf met with Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and Representative Richard Renzi (R-AZ), Musharraf's third U.S. Congressional delegation of the day (reftel).  The group,s discussion focused on Iraq, the broader Middle East, and the Pak-Afghan border region.  --------------------------------------------- -- Muslim countries should play lead role in Iraq And help solve the Israeli-Palestinian dispute --------------------------------------------- --  2. (C) Musharraf noted that he and many Middle Eastern leaders were worried that a premature pull-out of U.S. and coalition forces from Iraq would spread sectarian strife throughout the Gulf region.  Musharraf underlined the importance of increasing the capacity of the Iraqi armed forces and police.  He noted there could be little improvement in the situation in Iraq without broader political participation from the Sunnis. Musharraf agreed with Senator McCain that Muslim countries needed to lead efforts to help Iraq's Shias, Sunnis, and Kurds reach political consensus before a major withdrawal of coalition troops. Musharraf said he understood U.S. public opinion was against prolonging U.S. presence in Iraq, but hoped U.S. leadership could communicate the importance of the mission in Iraq.  Turning to the future of Iraq, Musharraf hoped that Muslim peacekeeping troops (including Pakistanis) could replace U.S. forces under a United Nations umbrella.  3. (C) Conflicts outside Iraq also contributed to the unstable situation in the region, Musharraf said. Musharraf noted that in addition to Saudi King Abdullah,s work in forging an Arab consensus on Iraq, he was working on building consensus within the Muslim world on the Palestinian issue ) work that was slowly but surely bringing Syria back into the Arab fold.  Alluding to his own outreach to the moderate Muslim world, Musharraf noted there was space for non-Arab nations to play a role on Iraq and the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, and that Pakistan, Indonesia and Malaysia had agreed to form a united voice to help promote peace in the region. Musharraf said he was the first non-Arab leader invited to address the Arab League Summit.  4. (C) Musharraf said he believed Syrian President Bashar al-Assad could play a positive role in both Iraq and Lebanon, and that Assad could be \"handled\" if the U.S. understood his issues:  &If you want him to play ball, he needs comfort on other fronts -- namely, the Golan Heights.8  Turning to another Iraqi neighbor, Musharraf agreed with the delegation that Iran could not be allowed to create further divisions in Iraq.  ------------------------------------- The Pak-Afghan border: Past decisions created present security problem -------------------------------------  5. (C) When asked for his views on Afghanistan, Musharraf  ISLAMABAD 00001583  002 OF 003   said Pakistan was facing the fallout from security decisions made in the 1980s.  People who came to fight with the mujahideen against the Soviets settled in Pakistan's tribal areas and now had families.  These people -- mostly Uzbeks and Arabs -- developed links with al Qaeda.  Recently, tribal groups in both South and North Waziristan were taking action against Uzbeks and other foreigners because of the foreigners, cruel and high-handed behavior.  Pakistan's military provided covert support in the form of arms and ammunition. Musharraf reported that in South Waziristan, a large group of foreign militants were surrounded on a ridge and would soon surrender.  6. (C) Originally, Musharraf said, the Taliban movement was a reaction against growing tribalism and warlordism in Afghanistan.  Since Russia and India supported Afghanistan's (ethnic Tajik) Northern Alliance, Pakistan's natural ally was the (ethnic Pashtun) Taliban.  This all changed after 9/11, Musharraf said, and Pakistan had captured and killed hundreds of al Qaeda fighters near Tora Bora.  -------------------------------------- We're Going After Militants: Bin Laden May Be Here, But Mullah Omar's Not --------------------------------------  7. (S/NF) Echoing similar statements he,d made during an earlier meeting with CODEL Tierney (reftel), Musharraf said that although he had no direct evidence, he thought al Qaeda leaders Osama Bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri were hiding in Bajaur Agency, since it was in (Afghan militant leader) Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's territory and bordered Afghanistan's Konar province.  The landscape in videos of Bin Laden and Zawahiri looked similar to Bajaur, Musharraf said, and the area provided comfort, high mountains, positive support, and an absence of U.S. troops in neighboring Konar.  8. (C) Musharraf voiced concern over Afghan President Karzai,s frequent pronouncements about Pakistan's &failure8 to capture Taliban leader Mullah Omar in Balochistan's capital Quetta.    &Let me tell you,8 Musharraf emphasized, &Omar would be mad to be in Quetta -- he has too many troops to command in southern Afghanistan to make it feasible.  In fact, the only parts of Balochistan where there are Pakistani Taliban are in the province's Afghan refugee camps, which we are planning to shut down.8 Musharraf said that most Pashtuns in Balochistan were traders and had no reason to join the Taliban.  &They want roads to increase their trade, not to fight.8  The same could not be said for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Musharraf said.  9. (C) Musharraf said the Taliban were mainly in Afghanistan.  Karzai,s policies, Musharraf believed, alienated Afghanistan's Pashtuns by favoring (ethnic Tajik) Panshiris. After Coalition forces joined the Northern Alliance to oust the Taliban government, there was no change in the ethnic makeup of the victors when it came to planning.  Panshiris were disproportionately represented in the government, even though they had never ruled before and were, Musharraf believed, the natural enemy of the country's majority Pashtuns.  ISLAMABAD 00001583  003 OF 003    -------------------------------------- A New Strategy in the Tribal Areas And the Ethnic Dimension in Afghanistan --------------------------------------  10. (C) Turning to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Musharraf stated that Taliban militants from Afghanistan drew support from Pakistan for re-supply, hospitals, recruitment, and indoctrination of new troops.  Musharraf emphasized military force alone could not deny terrorists safe haven in the Tribal Areas over the long term.  That was why, Musharraf explained, Pakistan was pursuing a four-pronged strategy that included military, political, development, and administrative elements.  The fencing of the Pak-Afghan border in some parts of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas would reduce some cross-border movement, he said, but it was not enough. Musharraf described development as the most forward-looking ) and in some ways most complex ) part of the strategy. Pakistan was looking for U.S. assistance and expertise.  --------------------------------------------- --- Pakistan's Taliban Problem Is An Extremism Issue --------------------------------------------- ---  11. (C) One of Pakistan's biggest concerns, Musharraf said, was the spread of talibanization, especially into settled and urban areas.  Countering talibanization required a well thought out strategy to cleanse society of the Taliban culture and to encourage moderation.  Modernization and economic development were the way forward, Musharraf noted. Talibanization was even spreading to Islamabad, as you could see by the recent events at the Red Mosque (reported septel).  -------------------------------------------- Afghanistan's Poppy Industry Should Go Legal --------------------------------------------  12. (C) In response to McCain's question about whether Musharraf was worried Afghanistan would become a narco-state, Musharraf answered that he was, especially because if it did it would affect Pakistan.  Musharraf thought Afghanistan could follow the example of other countries -- such as India -- where narcotics were purchased legally and channeled into the international pharmaceutical industry.  It was a $500-600 million annual industry, Musharraf said, and the profits made from legal poppy sales could go toward poverty alleviation instead of to the Taliban. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/11/2007 13:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001607  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/11/2017 TAGS: PREL, PK, AF SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER OUTLINES NEXT STEPS FOR PAK-AFGHAN JIRGAS  REF: ISLAMABAD 1331 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) During an April 10 meeting with Deputy Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asian Affairs John Gastright  SIPDIS and the Charge, Minister of Internal Affairs and Chairman of Pakistan's Jirga Commission Aftab Ahmad Khan Sherpao said that the Pak-Afghan Jirga Commission meeting scheduled for 9-11 April in Kabul had been postponed. The Interior Minister needed to be in Pakistan to deal with events in Islamabad at the Jamia Hafsa Madrassa (septel), sectarian violence in Kurram Agency, and anti-Uzbek fighting in Wana.  2. (C) Sherpao said that no new date had been set for the Commission to meet, but he was optimistic that the process would move forward quickly once both sides approved the list of participants. Pakistan's list was complete, he said, and included tribal elders, politicians, cultural figures, journalists, and academics, mostly from the border areas of Northwest Frontier Province and Balochistan. Participants from Punjab and Sindh would be granted observer status only, as these provinces did not share a border with Afghanistan and did not have a jirga tradition. Sherpao said that he had not seen Afghanistan's participant list yet, but anticipated that it would be a national list.  3. (C) Sherpao reiterated his belief that small jirgas along the Pak-Afghan border would have been a more effective approach to solving border area security problems, but went on to add that there would be value in allowing both sides to discuss the value of cooperation on economic and development issues in a large forum.  4. (C) Once both sides agree to one another's participant lists, Pakistan will gather its participants together to brief them on the goals for the jirga and how to avoid potential problems, Sherpao said. Once both sides are ready, the first round of the jirga will likely be in Kabul, Sherpao predicted. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/12/2007 12:44", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 001631  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, ASEC, PHUM SUBJECT: CODEL LOWEY MEETS WITH PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (S)  SUMMARY:  In an April 7 meeting with Codel Lowey, President Musharraf noted his continuing concern that HR-1 (the House version of the 9/11 legislation) would reinforce widely held Pakistani skepticism over the United States' long-term commitment to his country.  He reiterated his commitment to fighting militancy along the Pak-Afghan border.  The President pleaded for a Pakistan-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, explaining that such an agreement would encourage economic growth and thus discourage extremism.  Musharraf noted that media outlets entreating him to \"take action\" against extremists inside Islamabad's Red Mosque were not taking into account the street demonstrations that might ensue if any of the women in the mosque were killed or committed suicide during a police action.  Musharraf assured the codel that Pakistan's Strategic Forces Command had developed nuclear security safeguards that met international standards.  END SUMMARY.  INTRODUCTION  2.  (U)  After flying all night from Europe, Codel Lowey -- Congresswoman Nita Lowey (D-NY); Congressman Ed Royce (R-CA); Congressman Adam Schiff (D-CA); Congressman Steve Israel (D-NY); Congressman Ben Chandler (D-KY); Congressman Tim Ryan (D-OH); and Congressman Cliff Stearns (R-FL) -- arrived in Islamabad the morning of April 7.  After refreshing themselves in an arrival lounge spruced up for the occasion by Embassy GSO staff and the Pakistan Air Force, the codel moved to President Musharraf's Camp Office.  There, the President, wearing civilian clothes, greeted his fourth congressional delegation of the week.  Musharraf allowed the meeting to run significantly overtime, delaying the groundbreaking ceremony for the new Islamabad International Airport.  3.  (U)  After the meeting, the Codel Lowey boarded a Pakistan Army helicopter to travel to the earthquake zone, where Mrs. Lowey dedicated a new USAID-funded girls middle school.  Upon returning to Islamabad, the group boarded Embassy Narcotics Assistance Section airplanes to travel to Peshawar, where the Codel donated new equipment to the Frontier Corps and witnessed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding providing enhanced U.S. support to the Frontier Constabulary.  Back in Islamabad, the codel attended an Embassy reception where political, NGO, and relief agency officials exchanged ideas with the codel.  4.  (U)  On Easter Sunday, Codel Lowey traveled to Lahore. After a call on the Chief Minister (Septel), the delegation met with author and journalist Ahmed Rashid, then lunched with representatives of Pakistan's political elite.  After visiting a USAID competitiveness project, Codel Lowey watched the Waga Border Crossing ceremony before departing Pakistan from Lahore Airport.  5.  (U)  Following is a report on Codel Lowey's meeting with President Musharraf.  HR-1:  MUSHARRAF STILL CONCERNED  6.  (C)  According to Musharraf, HR-1 would cause some Pakistanis to doubt the United States' long-term commitment to Pakistan. (Note:  HR-1 is the House version of the 9/11 legislation. It includes a requirement that the U.S. President certify to Congress that Pakistan is fully contributing to the War on Terror.  End Note.)  Musharraf explained that the Pakistani public had not forgotten the Presler Sanctions years, particularly the \"F-16 incident\", when Pakistan paid for a number of F-16s but could not receive them because of sanctions.  Recounting in great detail the saga -- including Pakistan's being billed for the  ISLAMABAD 00001631  002 OF 004   depreciation of planes it never saw and being refused a refund on its down payment -- Musharraf stressed that anything that reminded Pakistanis of the sanctions years reinforced the widely held belief that the U.S. would turn its back on Pakistan again in the future.  PAK-AFGHAN BORDER  7.  (C)  Musharraf admitted the Pak-Afghan border was not as secure as he would like.  Nevertheless, he believed his plan to encourage tribes to take more responsibility for security in FATA was the right one.  Success against militants required a combination of military and political action.  His strategy of empowering tribal leaders was right, he said, though some of the implementation had been flawed; he assured the codel that he was involved personally in improving implementation tactics. He said the tribes slowly were turning against AQ and other foreign elements and were increasingly cooperating with the government in efforts to root out the foreigners.  Musharraf intended to maintain pressure on tribal leaders to live up to agreements they had signed with the government.  8.  (S)  Musharraf stressed that Pakistan was committed to shutting down Taliban and Anti-Coalition Militia elements. The ISI was working to capture other militant leaders. Mullah Omar, said the President, was in Afghanistan.   PAKISTAN WANTS AN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT  9.  (C)  Musharraf noted that Pakistan's economy was growing at over seven percent per annum.  The macro-economic indicators were strong, and Pakistan now wanted trade more than aid.  Increased trade with the U.S., would reduce poverty and unemployment and in turn discourage religious extremism.  Musharraf argued that a Free Trade Agreement with the United States would support investment in Pakistan and keep Pakistan's economy growing.  Acknowledging that the U.S. wanted to negotiate a Bilateral Investment Treaty before discussing the possibility of an FTA, Musharraf said that his technical experts believed a BIT would be of limited value without an accompanying FTA.  10.  (C)  Answering questions from the Codel about how Musharraf would make sure an FTA actually benefited poor people, not just wealthy business owners, the President explained he had a master plan to encourage small and medium enterprises, the types of businesses that would benefit most from an FTA.   EDUCATION  11.  (C)  Musharraf reported the biggest challenge facing Pakistan was universalizing education by ensuring that every child lived within walking distance to a school.  The government, he said, was recruiting people in local communities and training them to be teachers.  The government was also working to improve the quality of all primary and secondary schools.  12.  (C)  The government planned to open nine new universities, reported the President.  Europe, East Asia and Turkey would provide curricula and, initially, teachers, but Pakistan would pay to develop the universities.  Musharraf also planned to encourage a technical education office that would work with the business community to produce graduates that could fill needs in the technical and other sectors.  13.  (C)  Musharraf explained that only three percent of students in Pakistan were enrolled in madrassahs.  He described madrassahs as \"an issue, not the issue, in  ISLAMABAD 00001631  003 OF 004   education.\"  With the help of the U.S., Pakistan had greatly increased its education budget, providing increasing numbers of families with alternatives to madrassah education. Musharraf reported that his government had officially registered most madrassahs and had encouraged foreign students to leave.  The only foreign students still allowed in Pakistan were those with \"No Objection Certificates\" from their home governments.  Musharraf also restated his commitment to introducing academic curricula in madrassahs.  EXTREMISM  14.  (C)  Musharraf emphasized that extremist parties had never polled more than five percent in a general election, except in 2002, when negative reaction to the war in Afghanistan pushed their results up to 18 percent.  He believed that in the next election, the religious parties would poll closer to their historical levels.  He predicted the religious parties would lose in the NWFP, where they now control the government, because they had not fulfilled their election promises.  15.  (C)  Musharraf explained to the codel that, while parts of FATA were \"on fire\" with extremism, the entirety of FATA was only one percent of the population of Pakistan, and the Waziristans were only .3 percent.  While noting that most Pakistanis were religious, he stressed that being religious should not be confused with being extremist.  16.  (C)  Musharraf reminded the codel that Pakistan was an illiterate and religious society.  Imposing change would not work; leaders needed to encourage social transformation through engagement with religious elements.  The alternative -- forcing secularism on society -- had backfired on the Shah of Iran.  RED MOSQUE  17.  (C)  Musharraf said he was troubled by the ongoing stand-off at the Red Mosque in Islamabad.  (Note:  The mosque, in the heart of Islamabad, adjoins a women's seminary that is home to 2,000-3,000 women.  Many of those women are orphans, widows, and divorcees.  For the last two months, they have been joined by several hundred extremist women and a fluctuating number of extremist men, some of them reportedly militants. The leaders of the mosque have demanded a variety of actions from the Government. The mosque issue will be updated septel.  End Note.)  Musharraf believed about 700-800 extremists were in the mosque and madrassah, and he believed they would commit suicide if attacked.  It was the fear that some of the women would commit suicide -- or be killed in an ensuing fight -- that had kept him from using force to end the stand off.  Aside from the moral problem of causing the death of young women, Musharraf worried that attacking the mosque would provoke street unrest throughout the country.  18.  (C)  Musharraf noted that religious scholars were publicly and adamantly opposing the militants' actions at the Red Mosque.  He said religious leaders were on television and the radio every night saying that the leaders of the sit-in were \"mad.\"  As the sit-in leaders realized they had lost the public's support, they would be more willing to strike a deal with the government.  19.  (C)  Musharraf promised that, once the crisis is resolved, he will assure the arrest of the two mosque leaders instigated the stand-off.  CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY  20.  (C)  Musharraf said he had known that issuing a reference against the Chief Justice would cause turbulence,  ISLAMABAD 00001631  004 OF 004   but he believed he had no choice.  Even with hindsight, he would take the same action again.  Musharraf explained that the Chief Justice had forced officials to appoint his son to the Health Ministry and then to a senior police position despite the fact that the son had failed the civil service exams.  (The President related that the son had scored 13/100 on his English exam.)  The Chief Justice of the High Court of Balochistan complained to Musharraf about the Chief Justice's intervening to order friends released on bail, according to Musharraf, and the Chief Justice had also interfered in police investigations against friends.  He claimed that the Justice was refusing to clear names for the High Court in Punjab, and instead was insisting on the appointment of his friends.  21.  (C)  Musharraf said he would like to get the true story of the Chief Justice out, but since the case was now sub judice, the government could not comment.  He said his actions had been completely constitutional, and that he was confident the Supreme Judicial Council would handle the matter correctly.  NUCLEAR SECURITY  22.  (S)  Musharraf explained that the highly secret and decentralized nature of Pakistan's nuclear development program up until the Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests had enabled AQ Khan to export technological know-how without being observed by key officials.  He noted that, since the AQ Khan period, Pakistan had created a Strategic Forces Command to bring Pakistan's nuclear security safeguards up to international standards.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD625|07ISLAMABAD897", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/13/2007 6:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 001647  SIPDIS  ///////////////////////////////////////////// //////////////// ///////////CORRECTED COPY - COLLECTIVE ADDED///////////////// ///////////////////////////////////////////// ////////////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: 3,000 WOMEN, A MOSQUE, AND GUNS:  A STORY ANY JOURNALIST WOULD LOVE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 0625      B. ISLAMABAD 0897  ISLAMABAD 00001647  001.2 OF 004   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION  1.  (C)  Fiery headlines in the Pakistani and international press about Islamabad's Red (Lal) Mosque and the adjacent women's madrassah (seminary) could lead readers to believe that talibanization has spread to Islamabad  -- or that extremism has appeared suddenly at the Red Mosque.  In reality, the Red Mosque and its leaders have been at the center of Islamist ideology for decades.  The current controversy will probably be resolved in the next few weeks, and President Musharraf's plan to use religious leaders to educate the public on the problematic nature of the Red Mosque's efforts seems to be working.   The President treads a narrow line, though.  A misstep leading to the death of a female seminarian could ignite the street.  End Summary and Introduction.  THE RED MOSQUE -- NOT NEW TO CONTROVERSY  2.  (C)  Islamabad,s Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) and its adjacent women's seminary, Jamia Hafsa Madrassah, are located in Islamabad's section G-6, within a mile of the Diplomatic Enclave and Pakistan's government buildings.   Jamia Hafsa is reportedly home to between 2,500 and 3,000 girls and women. The Red Mosque also operates Islamabad,s largest men's madrassah, Jamia Fareedia, located near Faisal Mosque, about five miles from the Red Mosque.  Jamia Fareedia houses 7,000 boys and men.  Pakistan Army officials tell us that President Zia al Haq chose Jamia Fareedia's location for strategic reasons:  within 15 minutes, thousands of madrassah students can take to the streets anywhere in Islamabad.  3.  (C)  General Zia al Haq was a leading patron of the Red Mosque and was close to the mosque's late leader , Maulana Abdullah.  Throughout the 1980s, Abdullah used his authority to encourage jihad against the Soviets in Afghanistan.  In the 1990s, the mosque was known to be sympathetic to al Qaeda.  Unknown assailants assassinated Maulana Abdullah inside the mosque on October 7, 1998.  Since then, Abdullah's sons, Maulana Abdul Aziz and Maulana Abdul Rashid Ghazi, have run the mosque and its associated madrassahs.  According to Embassy contacts, while Maulana Abdullah was relatively well educated and could be progressive on many issues, his sons lack their father's sophistication and nuance.  4.  (C)  After 9/11, the Red Mosque leadership officially severed links with AQ, though journalists report the brothers' sermons have continued to encourage sympathy for Osama bin Laden.  Both brothers reportedly have called for jihad against America and are vocal in their support of the Taliban.  According to the press, the brothers were a driving force behind a 2003 fatwa (religious decree) denying Muslim burials to Pakistani army forces killed while fighting in South Waziristan.  The mosque also was a center of anti-Western fervor during the 2006 Danish cartoon demonstrations.  RECENT HEADLINES  5.  (C)  In mid-January, the Capital Development Authority began demolishing mosques built without permits on public land.  On January 20, the Development Authority razed Amir Hamza mosque, which was adjacent to the Red Mosque and to Jamia Hafsa, the women's seminary.  On January 27, dozens of girls and women from Jamia Hafsa entered a public library next to their madrassah and began a sit-in, demanding that the Government not tear down any part of their madrassah,  ISLAMABAD 00001647  002.2 OF 004   much of which is built illegally on land owned by the Ministry of Education.  (Note:  As explained in  paragraph 14, many women in the madrassah are orphans or widows; they would have nowhere to go if the madrassah were torn down. End Note.)  The women later announced other demands, including that the government legalize all 81 mosques the Capital Development Authority had declared illegally built. The women also called for the strict interpretation of Sharia Law in Pakistan.  Negotiators from the Ministry of Religion eventually agreed to a compromise on the mosque destruction question, but the women never officially left the library (reftels).  While the library is again open to the public, the \"sit-in\" technically continues.  6.  (C)  Just as the library controversy dropped out of the news, Jamia Hafsa was on the front pages again on March 27, when a group of students broke into an alleged brothel near the mosque and kidnapped three women and a six-month-old baby.  Police entered the seminary to demand the release of the women and baby and to arrest some of the instigators. Students took two police officers hostage.  Rumors quickly circulated via text messaging that 7,000 male students from Jamia Fareedia madrassah were on their way to join the 3,000 female students inside Jamia Hafsa, leading the international press to report that 10,000 extremist madrassah students were protesting in downtown Islamabad.  In reality, no more than 1,000 male students arrived at the madrassah that night. Police negotiated the release of their colleagues, and two days later the Jamia Hafsa students released the three kidnapped women and the baby.  Police have not arrested anyone for the kidnapping.  7.  (C)  On April 6, the Jamia Hafsa administration announced it would launch a Sharia Court inside the Red Mosque.  It was the third time since January the students had called for the implementation of Sharia Law inside Islamabad.  Journalists reported male and female madrassah students patrolling markets and harassing CD and DVD stores, at least for a few hours one day.  Embassy employees have not witnessed any such patrols, but journalists tell us they did watch a group of students burning a large number of CDs near a market.  THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY REACTS  8.  (C)  On April 7, President Musharraf told Codel Lowey that the best way to deal with the problems at the Red Mosque was to encourage religious leaders to educate the general Pakistani public on errors in the Red Mosque teachings. Religious scholars, including those known to be opposed to President Musharraf, have been on television nightly since late March criticizing the Red Mosque leadership and arguing that the leadership's behavior is un-Islamic.  In March, Wafaqul Madaris, Pakistan,s largest seminary oversight organization, revoked Jamia Hafsa,s accreditation, a move designed to isolate the Mosque's leaders and to pressure them to reform their teachings. Meanwhile, the religious parties have distanced themselves from the Red Mosque. Liaquat Baloch, Vice-President of the Jama'at Islami, recently announced that no religious party endorsed the madrassah students, actions and that no society would allow citizens to take the law into their own hands.  THE END IS IN SIGHT. . . .AGAIN  9.  (C)  On April 9, PolOffs met with Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, president of the ruling PML-Q.   Shujaat had met with Maulana Aziz and Maulana Ghazi on April 7 to broker an end to the tensions.  Shujaat presented the brothers with the government's list of demands, to which the brothers were generally amenable.  Shujaat believed the brothers were worried they had lost control of the students and that they had damaged their standing in the international madrassah  ISLAMABAD 00001647  003.2 OF 004   community.  The brothers, according to Shujaat, were eager to end the crisis and quiet the madrassah.  10.  (C)  The Government's list of demands included:  --Remove all signs of militancy from the mosque, including weapons and banners --Vacate the library --No students carrying swagger sticks (baton-like weapons) --Only legitimate students in the madrassah --Abolish the Sharia Court --Stop policing markets --Remove posters from neighborhood --Remove the recently erected tent compound for male students who were \"guarding\" the madrassah --No interaction with the media  11.  (C)  On April 8, the madrassah presented Shujaat a list of 62 counter demands.  According to Shujaat, the list was largely a face-saving measure, as the government already had met most of the requirements.  The outstanding demands were, in Shujaat's opinion, not generally objectionable:  --Form a committee to decide all question of mosque demolition.  If mosques are demolished, the government should build replacement mosques on other sites. --Monitor television programming for immoral content; increase the amount of religious programming on television. (Shujaat said that, while the censorship was not possible, the government would consider the religious programming question.) --Enforce laws against the sale of adult movies. --Close brothels.  Find alternative livelihoods for prostitutes.  12.  (C)  Comment:  For months, the conventional wisdom was that sophisticated men were manipulating vulnerable women inside Jamia Hafsa.  The most recent list of demands from the students, though, emphasizes action against pornography rather than all videos and requests government help for former prostitutes.  The tone of the list may indicate that the women have begun to assert themselves -- a hypothesis Shujaat accepts.  End Comment.  13.  (C)  Shujaat believes the controversy will be over in a matter of days.  On April 9, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz told Charge the situation would be quiet within two weeks.  FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS  14.  (C)  Q:  Why don't the girls' parents get them out of that place?  A:  Many of the girls and women living in Jamia Hafsa are orphans, widows, divorcees, and other vulnerable women.  They entered the madrassah because, in a country with a limited social safety net, they have nowhere else to go.  Contacts report that many women in Jamia Hafsa lost their families in the October 2006 earthquake or have been forced to leave FATA for economic or social reasons.  15.  (C)  Q:  The press has printed photos of female students in niqab (face covering) carrying rifles.  Are the women actually armed?  A:  Possibly.  Men from Jamia Fareedia have for months been posted on top of the wall that surrounds the women's madrassah.  They are not visibly armed, but journalists tell us they have seen weapons inside the complex, in the area where the men are camping.  A major proportion of the Jamia Fareedia students are from the Frontier, where owning and  ISLAMABAD 00001647  004.2 OF 004   carrying weapons is a way of life.  Rifles are not uncommon in Islamabad; they can be purchased in many markets.  16.  (C)  Q:  Why aren't the police enforcing the writ of the state?  Shouldn't people be arrested for kidnapping -- or for inciting violence?  A:  President Musharraf told Codel Lowey April 7 that he had reason to believe several scores of female students were prepared to commit mass suicide if the police took action against Jamia Hafsa or the Red Mosque.  Additionally, it is likely some of the students are armed.  In a shoot-out with police, female students might die.  Besides being morally unacceptable, Pakistani authorities worry that deaths of female students could cause major street demonstrations throughout Pakistan.  17.  (C)  Q:  Are police going to arrest the brothers?  A:  Both President Musharraf and Interior Minister Sherpao have told us the Government will arrest Maulana Aziz and Maulana Ghazi for incitement and other crimes.  They have not told us when they might arrest the men, nor how they would go about it.  18.  (C)  Q:  If the brothers have been inciting hatred for years, why hasn't the government acted?  A:  According to the press, at least one brother was arrested in August 2004 for transporting rockets in the trunk of his car.  The Religious Affairs Minister eventually arranged his release, in part to maintain inter-religious harmony.  While many government officials have reportedly called for the brothers' arrest for years, others have argued that arresting the men would destabilize the street.  President Musharraf told Codel Lowey on April 7 that attempting to enforce moderation in Iran had backfired on the Shah.  Musharraf preferred to work toward transforming the mindset of the population -- something he admitted would take time.  19.  (C)  Q:  The Pakistani press is reporting that talibanization has spread to Islamabad.  Is that true?  A:  The Red Mosque has been Islamist for decades.  It has long attracted students of a certain mindset; many of the current students are from the Frontier, where talibanization is a concern.  The presence of those students in Islamabad, though, does not mean Islamabad's citizens are becoming talibanized.  20.  (C)  Q:  So is this a big story?  Photos of veiled women posing with AK-47s sell newspapers. Clearly, recent events at the Red Mosque raise serious questions about how the State should enforce its writ.  But this is not a new question, particularly in relation to the Red Mosque.  Benazir Bhutto's Interior Minister, Aitzaz Ahsan, once ordered the arrest of Maulana Abdullah; the government released him not long after the arrest.  21.  (C)  Comment:   As the President knows too well, he is dealing with a situation for which there is no perfect answer.  Not acting leaves him open to criticism he is encouraging talibanization; acting precipitously could destabilize the street, not to mention lead to unnecessary deaths.  For now, he appears to be proceeding at a measured pace, allowing the tide of public opinion to turn against the brothers' actions before he eventually moves against them. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/13/2007 11:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001659  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/13/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: ANOTHER COUNCIL MEETING, ANOTHER ROUND OF PROTESTS  REF: ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU) The Supreme Judicial Council met again on April 13 to continue hearings on \"non-functional\" Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry.  Initial media reports indicate the proceedings focused on the composition of the Supreme Judicial Council.  Media outlets reported Chaudhry's head lawyer, Aitzaz Ahsan, argued three of the justices on the Council were unfit to rule in the case.  The in camera nature of the proceedings was also discussed, but initial reporting suggested no decision was taken on the matter.  The Council adjourned until April 18.  2.  (C) Generally peaceful protests took place in major cities throughout Pakistan.  In Islamabad, reports of protest numbers varied widely, from under 3,000 to as high as 7,000. Post noted similar reporting on the April 3 protests proved unreliable.  Post estimated that at mid-day, between 1,500 and 3,000 political party activists and lawyers raised flags and chanted anti-government slogans on Constitution Avenue in Islamabad.  (Note:  Some protestors carried signs indicating support for Red Mosque leadership (reftel).  End Note.)  In Punjab, about 1,500 lawyers and party activists traveled from around the province to Lahore to join peaceful protests. Participants marched from the Lower Court to the Punjab Assembly building; they wore black armbands and tore down posters of Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi.  In Karachi, despite a meager showing of protestors (200-300), the day's only widely reported violent incident took place when lawyers reportedly beat two journalists covering the gathering.  3.  (C) Although the political parties remain essentially divided - they cannot agree on a coherent, collective course of action regarding the Chief Justice issue - they displayed better coordination in Islamabad during this round of protests.  The Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, the minor but popular Tehreek-i-Insaaf, and a coalition of religious parties met in the capital city this past week to coordinate routes and times, which resulted in a mid-morning convergence on Constitution Avenue of three protest groups coming from three different directions.  The Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians remained, as it has throughout the Chief Justice protests, less open to organizing joint protests than the other parties.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/16/2007 12:12", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 001687  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DEPT FOR SCA/PB, DRL PLEASE PASS TO SECRETARY RICE, DEPUTY SECRETARY NEGROPONTE, U/S BURNS, U/S HUGHES, U/S DOBRIANSKY  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, SOCI, KWMN, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR TAHIR-KHELI'S ISLAMABAD VISIT   1. (SBU) Summary. Senior Advisor to the Secretary of State for Women's Empowerment Ambassador Shirin Tahir-Kheli met with a wide spectrum of government officials, civil society, and media -- and garnered significant media coverage -- during her March 14-19 visit to Islamabad.  Her interlocutors presented a range of opinions on the state of women's empowerment in Pakistan, the government's recent passage of the \"Women's Protection Bill\", and what else needs to be done. End summary.  ------------------------- An Array of Interlocutors -------------------------  2. (SBU) During her five-day tour d'horizon of women's empowerment issues in Islamabad, Ambassador Tahir-Kheli's packed schedule included meetings with:  -- President Pervez Musharraf -- Mrs. Sebha Musharraf -- Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz -- Senate Chairman Mohammedmian Somroo and two women Senators -- Minister of Women's and Youth Affairs Sumaira Malik and her staff -- Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan -- Mutahidda Majlis-e Amal's senior women parliamentarians Samia Raheel Qazi, Balqis Saif, and Kaiser Firdous -- Secular opposition parliamentarians: Tehmina Daultana (PML-N), Fauzia Wahab (PPP),Rukhsana Zuberi (PPP), and Barrister Sadia Abbasi (PML-N) -- More than 60 civil society leaders (NGOs who assist women, women's rights activists, and media) -- The students and faculty of Fatima Jinnah Women's University (where Ambassador Tahir-Kheli gave a talk) -- Students, parents, and community leaders of two schools run by U.S.-based NGO Development in Literacy  --------------------------------------------- ------------ GOP Bullish On Pakistan's Progress in Women's Empowerment --------------------------------------------- ------------  3. (SBU) Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz and Minister of Women's and Youth Affairs Sumaira Malik gave Ambassador Tahir-Kheli optimistic readouts on the government's \"significant progress\" on the issue of women's empowerment, saying that the government had made women's empowerment a major priority. Beginning with a quote from the founder of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who said \"if women are not given a place side-by-side with men, there will be no progress\" both Aziz and Malik -- in separate meetings -- proudly touted Pakistan's recent achievements:  -- One of the highest numbers of women participating in the political process (33% in the provincial and national assemblies, 33% in local government), Malik suggested that Pakistan could be a role model to Afghan women in this area;  -- A recent doubling of the quota for women in government jobs to 10% from the current 5%;  -- Graduating the first batch of women Air Force Officers;  -- Graduating the first batch of women Army officers;  -- Amending laws to allow women to have flexibility to work in the evening; and  -- Passing a progressive \"Women's Protection Bill.\"  ISLAMABAD 00001687  002 OF 003    4. (SBU) Describing the Women's Protection Bill as the \"first time Pakistani women feel a sense of protection and that the government is doing something for them,\" Malik said getting the bill passed was a difficult task.  She described this process as a balancing act between placating liberal elements who said the bill didn't go far enough and Islamist elements who said the bill was un-Islamic.  When asked about implementation of the bill and how the Government of Pakistan had planned to advertise to women that the law had been passed, Malik and Prime Minister Aziz both said they had gone on speaking tours to inform Pakistani women of their rights, and that they would launch a public relations campaign using television, radio and other media sources. Malik also said the government had started a training module at the \"Women's Political School\" -- a training program for female local government leaders -- with the hope that councilors who understood the new law and their legal rights would then spread the word to their constituents.  Once women know about the law, the next challenge will be implementing the bill, because it requires changing procedures, getting forensic evidence properly collected and admitted, and changing mindsets of judges and families.  ---------------------------------- Civil Society's Pragmatic Concerns ----------------------------------  5. (SBU) In discussions with a range of civil society personalities -- from women who run crisis shelters and vocational training programs to female lawyers, journalists, and human rights activists -- women acknowledged the increasing role of women in Pakistani society, particularly in the realm of political participation, but also expressed sincere concerns about the state of women in Pakistan.  Many were concerned by what they see as an increase in crimes against women, which often feature prominently in national newspapers.  When asked about legal protections for women, most said they were glad the government had passed last year's domestic violence bill and this year's women's protection bill, but were concerned that they were not being implemented.  As Shehnaz Bokhari, who runs a crisis center for the victims of domestic violence, put it, \"these bills are a good start, but the institutions needed to carry a case through to justice don't work.\"  Others told Ambassador Tahir-Kheli that one element of the new \"Women's Protection Bill\" -- which changes the procedures for how a rape victim would file a case, moving it from her local police station to the regional courthouse -- will actually make it more difficult for a woman to get justice because courthouses are located further away than local police stations.  (Note: The government argues that it changed procedures to mitigate routine complaints that police officers further abuse rape victims at the police station and take bribes from the perpetrator not to file the report.  They argue that shifting cases to regional courthouses improves the process and adds a layer of accountability, because more senior, better educated personnel will handle the cases. End note).  ------------------------------------- View from the MMA: Some Common Ground -------------------------------------  6. (SBU) Three senior leaders of key Islamist political party Jamaat-i Islami's (JI) Women's Wing -- Samia Raheel Qazi (JI leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed's daughter and leader of the JI Women's Wing), Balqis Saif (a teacher from Balochistan), and Kaiser Firdous (a former Pakistani Air Force Medical Corps  ISLAMABAD 00001687  003 OF 003   officer) -- discussed the Islamist coalition's perspective on women's empowerment in Pakistan.  Qazi, the most outspoken of the three, began the meeting by emphasizing that Pakistan's Islamist parties are \"very focused on the problems of women...we're not against things that help women.\"  She went on to explain that Pakistan's Islamist coalition, the Mutahidda Majlis-e Ammal (MMA), which includes JI, does not support the government's efforts because it is \"focusing on the wrong issues...we want to tackle the correct issues.\"  In the MMA's eyes, the Women's Protection bill is unislamic because it sought to tone down the hudood ordinances; Qazi, Saif, and Firdous said the bill they wanted to see was one that helps women get access to justice.  MMA members also pointed to an alleged recent increase in violence against women, which they claimed was evidence that the bill had taken things in the wrong direction.  Qazi said that she had written her own bill -- one that would have helped women in prisons get legal and medical aid, trained police and judges to handle hudood cases, and trained people to handle forensic evidence -- but lamented that the government had only taken the title, \"the Women's Protection Bill.\"  They also said that the government needed to tackle what they believe are the \"real\" concerns for women in Pakistan: clean drinking water, safe and good education for girls in Pakistan, and health care (especially reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, kidney disorders, diabetes, TB, and malaria). (Comment:  These three very articulate, well-educated women dispel the pervasive belief that the religious coalition they belong to is \"unenlightened,\" \"anti-women\", and retrogressive. The concerns they raised about the Women's Protection Bill and access to justice for women echo those from the most liberal women's activists and demonstrates that there may be room for dialogue and joint action between women across the divides of religion and ideology.  End comment.)  7. (U) This cable has been cleared by Ambassador Shirin Tahir-Kheli.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/16/2007 13:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001688  SIPDIS  //////////////COLLECTIVE ADDED//////////////////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/12/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE UPDATE  REF: ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)   1. (C) Talks continued over the weekend between the leaders of the Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) and the government. Maulana Abdul Aziz and Maulana Ghazi, the two leaders of the mosque, have softened their public tone toward the government. During Friday,s sermon, Aziz delivered a more tempered message than those of past Fridays, emphasizing that he was open to talks with the government and would keep the newly-established (and non-negotiable) Shariah court \"non-functional\" until talks with the government concluded. Ghazi told reporters that he has been in continuous phone contact with Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and, in Ghazi,s opinion, Shujaat had a positive attitude and was doing \"all he could do\" to accommodate the mosque's demands. In the mean time, those demands appear to have increased: on April 15, Ghazi vowed to shut down liquor sales in Islamabad.  2. (C) On April 14, a group of students claiming to be from the Red Mosque raided a video store in Bharu Kahu, about 20 km from Islamabad. They burned CDs and videos outside the store, claiming to enforce their brand of Shariah law. Local police responded immediately, arresting three students and charging them under the Anti-Terrorist Act. Ghazi later claimed that no one from his mosque was involved in the incident.  3. (C) In opposition to the Red Mosque's calls for Shariah law, the secular Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) organized a large rally in Karachi on April 15. Newspapers carried pictures of thousands of protestors clogging the main streets of Karachi; including politicians, actors, artists, and religious leaders -- all protesting against religious extremism. MQM party chief in exile Altaf Hussain addressed the crowd via telephone from London, calling on the government to evacuate the mosque and associated madrassa. The rally denounced the Red Mosque's actions as violating the teachings of Islam. Leaders from several religious sects issued fatwas (religious decrees) at the rally condemning mosques built on illegally occupied land such as the Red Mosque.  4. (C) The government,s response continues to be measured, with Shujaat as the lead negotiator. Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz publicly said there will be no compromise on the writ of the government, but the government wishes to resolve the issue peacefully. The police presence in the markets and areas near the Red Mosque has increased significantly.  5. (C) Comment: The leaders of the Red Mosque have ceded little ground to the government so far, and the continued talks with Chaudhary Shujaat thus far have only given the authorities more time to peacefully resolve the issue. The large turnout at this weekend's MQM rally was evidence that most Pakistanis disagree with the Red Mosque's attempts to take the law into its own hands. Our police contacts continue to emphasize that direct confrontation is the least desirable option. However, it remains to be seen how long the government will allow the current situation to play out before it feels it is losing political capital. Today in a meeting with the Charge, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz reaffirmed that the government was continuing to build public support against the Red Mosque agitators and that the leadership was expecting a peaceful resolution within the next two weeks. End Comment.     BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647|07ISLAMABAD1688", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/17/2007 11:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001698  SIPDIS  ///////COLLECTIVE ADDED///////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/17/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE CALLS OFF NEGOTIATIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1688      B. ISLAMABAD 1647      C. AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) On April 16, the administration of the Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) announced that it would suspend talks with the government, after mosque leaders accused the government of aerial surveillance and spraying unknown gases on the mosque. Red Mosque leader Maulana Ghazi told a news conference that, \"spraying of gas and taking snaps of girl students with very low flight chopper on civil population is violation of the dialogue process as well as international laws.\" The mosque administration claims that several students fainted as a result of the gas and many others suffered from eye and skin irritations. There have been no confirmations of these injuries and area hospitals have not treated any gas victims. Maulana Ghazi said that Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain expressed ignorance of any helicopter actions. Police sources corroborate that, on April 15 and 16, helicopters flew over the mosque to assess the situation and to gauge the presence of weapons. On April 16, students and sympathizers of the Red Mosque staged a small demonstration and blocked the road outside the mosque to protest the surveillance and alleged gas usage.  2. (C) Comment: Leaders of the Red Mosque have seized this incident as an excuse to stall talks and try to gain leverage in the face of growing public sentiment against the mosque, as evidenced by the recent MQM rally in Karachi (numbering 70,000- 100,000 people) and increasing media criticism. While the police have been using helicopters to monitor the situation inside the mosque and remain on standby in the vicinity, there is no repeat no evidence of any gas being released. Maulana Ghazi's statements are unlikely to gain him any ground in negotiations with Shujaat, and the government continues to anticipate a peaceful resolution to this conflict. End Comment.    BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1659", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/18/2007 13:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001737  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/18/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PINS, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE: ORDERLY PROTESTS, SUPREME JUDICIAL COUNCIL ADJOURNS TO APRIL 24  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1659       B. ISLAMABAD 1456      C. ISLAMABAD 1329  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (SBU) THE HEARING: The Supreme Judicial Council handling the reference against suspended Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry met today (April 18) and, as expected, adjourned without major developments.  The next hearings are scheduled for April 24, May 2 and May 3.  Meanwhile, Chief Justice Chaudhry filed a constitutional petition with the Supreme Court detailing over one hundred points, including challenging the Supreme Judicial Council's composition and constitutionality.  Chaudhry's lead counsel, Aitzaz Ahsan, wants the Supreme Court to meet April 20 to address the petition before the Supreme Judicial Council proceeds. Additionally, Ahsan, at today's hearing, asked the Council to decide quickly whether certain of its members were biased and should step aside from ruling on the Chief Justice reference.  The Council demurred, telling Ahsan that it would not deal with this objection to the Council's composition in isloation.  2. (SBU) THE PROTESTS -- snapshots from around Pakistan:  -- Islamabad: In what has become a ritual of sorts in Islamabad, the authorities deployed early in the morning and closed off the main avenues around the Supreme Court. Lawyers and political parties protested peacefully and did not come into conflict with the police.  Estimated numbers range from 3,000 to 8,000 participants.  More important than the actual figure is the consensus that the turnout was \"less impressive than last time\" (April 13), as one local journalist at the scene characterized it.  Other Embassy contacts reported that the MMA was the largest political presence, followed by the PPP.  The protest concluded and traffic returned to normal by early afternoon.  Local television channels gave minimal airing to the protest -- in stark contrast to previous protests when they devoted full-day live coverage to the situation on the streets.  -- Lahore: An estimated 600-700 lawyers and 250-300 political party members marched peacefully to the Lahore High Court. Cooperation between the marchers and local officials remained good.  The protest was somewhat smaller than the previous one.  The PML-N was notable in its absence (they made a better showing in Islamabad) and the PPP continued to send only token numbers of marchers.  -- Karachi: In the middle of the day, an estimated 400-700 lawyers marched from the city courts to the High Court and then protested at the Chief Minister's house.  Separately, 250-300 Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy protestors staged at the Karachi Press Club.  Both rallies dispersed peacefully.  The Islamist party alliance MMA has announced a rally at 17:00 local time -- a crowd of 1,000 is expected.  -- Peshawar: A group of approximately 150-200 lawyers protested peacefully in support of the Chief Justice.  No political parties took part.  The size of the protests in Peshawar has shrunk considerably.  3. (C) THE UPSHOT: Today's events underscore that the Supreme Judicial Council is taking a methodical, unhurried approach to the Chief Justice reference.  The many petitions filed before the Supreme Court challenging various aspects of the case serve to complicate matters.  Legal sources tell us that it would theoretically take years for the Supreme Court to deal with all of the petitions.  Meanwhile, rising temperatures will make it increasingly difficult for parties to persuade their members to take to Islamabad's blistering hot streets.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/20/2007 10:55", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001779  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/16/2017 TAGS: KNNP, PREL, PGOV, PK, IN SUBJECT: DELEGATION ADVANCES NON-PRO DIALOGUE  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires a.i. Peter W. Bodd per 1.4 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  Summary:  A delegation from the Departments of State and Energy advanced key U.S.-Pakistan nonproliferation objectives during a late March visit to Islamabad.  The delegation aimed to put various nonproliferation initiatives in the context of the overall bilateral relationship and to encourage the Pakistanis to make progress in a number of areas that have lagged in recent years, including establishment of an independent export control authority and cooperation on the U.S.-led Second Line of Defense/Megaports initiative.  The delegation also proposed new areas of cooperation in radiological security and explored border security systems training.  The visit underscored Pakistan's political commitment to a cooperative U.S.-Pakistan nonproliferation relationship.  It was also a reminder of the importance of remaining closely engaged with the Pakistani bureaucracy, especially at working levels, to maintain progress on sensitive and technically complex issues.  End Summary.  2.  (C) John Schlosser, Director of the Regional Affairs office in the Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, and Kathryn Schultz, Senior Advisor in the International Security and Nonproliferation Bureau, led a 7-person delegation for meetings on nonproliferation in Islamabad March 19-23.  The Department of Energy was represented by the National Nuclear Security Administration's Kelly Cummins, Jimmie Collins, Anne Kohnen, Christopher Landers and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory's Greg Herdes.  The delegation met with officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Agency, the Central Board of Revenue, and the Strategic Planning Directorate.  Pakistan committed to a broad-based non-pro relationship --------------------------------------------- -----------  3.  (C) On March 19 Additional Secretary for UN and Economic Coordination Tariq Osman Hyder hosted the delegation for a meeting at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to kick-off the working-level dialogue.  Representatives from the Strategic Planning Directorate also participated.  Both sides stressed the continuing commitment of their governments to a broad-based nonproliferation relationship, as pledged in the March 2006 joint statement issued by Presidents Bush and Musharraf.  Schlosser, while recognizing the significant progress Pakistan made in the past five years, emphasized that establishing a track record of consistent nonproliferation cooperation was important to the strategic partnership and could help open the door to broader bilateral cooperation in the future.  Hyder responded, somewhat defensively, that Pakistan's commitment was clear and that there was no reluctance on the Pakistani side to moving forward in any area of nonproliferation cooperation.  Movement in establishing an Export Control Authority --------------------------------------------- -------  4. (C) Two and a half years after the passage of export control legislation in Pakistan's Parliament, which also called for the establishment of an independent export control authority, Pakistan appeared to be taking concrete steps toward establishing the office.  While no firm timelines were offered, Hyder gave a sketch of the personnel and place within the government of the planned Strategic Export Control Division.  The Authority will be under the command umbrella of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (though it will likely not be physically located at the Ministry), and it will be directed on a day-to-day basis by two Ministry of Foreign Affairs professionals with policy responsibility; Interior Ministry, Customs, and Strategic Planning Directorate officials will round out the interagency group.  Hyder said the current proposal for the Export Authority, which has yet to be approved by the Prime Minister, called for 117 personnel, a fourth of which would fulfill policy and coordination functions (17 officers and 11 inspectors).  The rest, Hyder noted, would be support staff.  Both sides agreed that specific areas of cooperation in support of the new body could be identified once it was open for business.  (Comment:  Although we have yet to see  the announcement of the Strategic Export Control Division or the name of its director, the Pakistani government appears to be moving toward establishing it within the next few months. Several embassy contacts have privately conveyed that the hold-up was in the Finance Ministry.  End comment.)  5. (C) Hyder hinted that the new Authority's initial operating budget might be considerably less than what the Foreign Ministry recommended.  He noted that use of telephone lines for e-mail communication between the new authority and the 76 official exit points would not be very secure and indicated this might be a possible area where U.S. support would be welcome.  Hyder indicated that the National Chemical Weapons Convention Authority would continue to have a role in regulating Convention-related chemical exports - it has led the effort since 2000 - even after the new Export Control Division is created.  Commodore Khalid Banuri, Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Office in the Strategic Planning Directorate, said the new Export Control Division would have overall authority for weapons of mass destruction and missile-related export control, and would be guided by the 2004 export control law.  As for biological weapons precursors controlled by the Australia Group, Hyder said that Pakistan was in the process of expanding its national control list to encompass those items.  Efforts to Implement UN Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1737 ------------------------------------------  6. (U) Hyder indicated that even without a functional independent export control authority up and running, Pakistan was working to implement its 2004 weapons of mass destruction law, including putting in place regulations consistent with UN Security Council Resolutions 1540, 1718, and 1737.  Hyder provided a copy of Pakistan's statutory notifications covering all regulations passed by Pakistan in support of resolutions 1718 and 1737. They are: Statutory Regulatory Order 1063(I)/2006 in support of operative paragraph 8 of UN Security Resolution 1718, notified on 16 October 2006 and published on 20 October 2006; Statutory Order 1289(I)/2006 in support of Resolution 1718, notified on 7 November 2006 and published on 30 December 2006; and Statutory Order 65(I)/2007 in support of Resolution 1737 notified on 15 January 2007 and published on 23 January 2007.  Megaports memorandum could be signed by late April --------------------------------------------- -----  7.  (C) Hyder and the Planning Directorate's Banuri noted there was \"no lack of commitment in principle\" to the Megaports Initiative, and that the Government of Pakistan was in the midst of finalizing a counter-draft of the Memorandum of Understanding.  Hyder and Banuri estimated the Government of Pakistan would provide the counter-draft within seven to thirty  days and hoped it could be signed shortly thereafter.  Hyder also noted Pakistan's desire to avoid language in the Memorandum of Understanding along the lines of \"nothing can be implemented unless a specific protocol is reached,\" desiring instead to get the framework agreement and all the issues spelled out from the start.  Second Line of Defense Project Manager Anne Kohnen seconded the desire to reach as comprehensive an agreement as possible, but noted the need to keep the Memorandum flexible enough to accommodate new issues that may arise.  Banuri provided a list of technical questions Pakistan had related to detection equipment, indicating that answers to these issues would help Pakistan expedite its response.  (Note:  Within one week, the Department of Energy responded to all of these questions. The ball is now back in Pakistan's court.  End Note.)  EXBS cooperation and a systems approach to border security --------------------------------------------- -------------  8.  (C) Both sides emphasized their continuing support for cooperation, particularly in the area of export control training, under the State Department's Export Control and Related Border Security Assistance (EXBS) program.  Commodore Banuri noted Pakistan's hope that this cooperation would remain low-profile, given domestic sensitivities.  (Note:  A number of recent EXBS activities with Pakistani officials have taken place outside Pakistan, e.g., in London.  End Note.)  9. (C) Jimmie Collins, Program Manager for the Department of Energy's Cooperative Border Security Program, introduced the notion of collaboration on new border security activities. Collins explained the Program's \"systems approach\" to border security.  She also outlined a cooperative approach to addressing border security challenges through engagement with both sides of the border and concurrent establishment of communications links.  Foreign Affairs Ministry officials appeared receptive to the proposal and suggested she discuss a detailed agenda for such engagement with appropriate authorities.  Loose Parts Monitoring System and other outstanding issues --------------------------------------------- -------------  10.  (C) Turning to a list of \"must-bring-ups\" in front of him, Hyder asked when Pakistan would receive the long-requested Loose Parts Monitoring System.  Kathryn Schultz responded that the U.S. was taking another look at Pakistan's request and hoped to have an answer within 45 days.  11. (C) Hyder noted that Pakistan was willing to join the Missile Technology Control Regime and was asking U.S. counterparts to support this bid.  Hyder explained that Pakistan saw value in being a part of the organization and in exchanging denial information.  Outreach, Banuri claimed, was inadequate and perfunctory, and observer status would also be insufficient.  Hyder stressed that those countries with capabilities should be brought into the export control groups so that they may act together.  12. (C) With respect to UN Security Council Resolution 1540, Hyder opined that the U.S. had overcome its concerns during exchanges at the 1540 experts group in the nonproliferation and strategic stability dialogue, and urged the U.S. to consider favorably the experts which Pakistan had nominated for the group.  Hyder expressed dismay that India had been harsher about resolution 1540 yet had still been invited to send experts.  (Note: The Department subsequently forwarded to USUN its approval of all three of the Pakistani-nominated experts.  End Note.)  13. (C) Turning to the India Civil Nuclear Cooperation Initiative, Hyder reiterated the Pakitani view that the Initiative would harm Pakistani security by allowing India to utilize all of its indigenous uranium resources in its military program.  He passed the U.S. delegation a paper, which he said represented his own calculations regarding the additional weapons-grade plutonium India would be able to accumulate if the civil nuclear initiative was implemented. He also noted Pakistan's restraint in not raising these concerns publicly, and underscored Pakistan's belief in a criteria-based approach at the Nuclear Suppliers Group.  14. (C) Hyder raised the Proliferation Security Initiative and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.  On the Global Initiative he reiterated concerns with the Terms of Reference.  On the Proliferation Security Initiative he claimed the U.S. and Pakistan had had only \"sporadic\" discussions and noted concerns about Pakistan being treated either as a \"target\" or a \"partner.\"  Schultz raised the prospect of Assistant Secretary-level nonproliferation and strategic stability talks with Pakistan at the earliest opportunity, where these and other issues could be discussed; Hyder and Banuri both supported the proposal.  Possibilities for radiological security cooperation --------------------------------------------- ------  15.  (S/NF) Members of the U.S. delegation met separately with Dr. Jamshed Azim Hashmi, Chairman of the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Agency, on March 21.  Two of the agency's other high-level leaders were also present - Executive Member Mohammad Shakilur Rahman and Chief Scientific Officer Muhammad Khaliq.  Hashmi reviewed Pakistan's Nuclear Security Action Plan, initiated in June 2006.  The Nuclear Regulatory Agency's Action Plan focused on five priorities:  1) Management of Radioactive Sources in category 1, 2, and 3 and evaluation of vulnerable facilities and supporting their efforts 2) Establishment of a Nuclear Safety/Security Training Center 3) Establishment of a National Nuclear Security Emergency Coordination Center 4) Locating and securing orphan radioactive sources 5) Provision of detection equipment at strategic points  16. (S/NF) The delegation welcomed this plan and turned to Kelly Cummins and Christopher Landers, who proposed Pakistani participation in the National Nuclear Security Administration's Global Threat Reduction Initiative.  Cummins outlined the Threat Reduction mission and program, which include:  A) Repatriation of U.S. and/or Russian origin Highly Enriched Uranium fuel from research reactors, B) Disposition of other high-risk vulnerable material, C) Conversion of research reactors from Highly-Enriched to Low-Enriched fuel, D) Security upgrades to research reactors, and E) Efforts to reduce risks posed by radiological materials of concern both domestically in the U.S. and in other countries.   17.  (S/NF) With respect to \"A\", Cummins noted approximately 80 Highly-Enriched Uranium spent fuel assemblies of U.S. origin that are located at the Pakistan Atomic Research Reactor-1 would be eligible for removal and disposition to the U.S. if Pakistan was interested.  Hashmi stated that he personally thought there was no further use for this material in Pakistan and that it should be returned to the U.S. Hashmi promised to convey the U.S. offer to the Chairman of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, which has responsibility for this fuel.  Turning to \"E\", which was the focus of the meeting, Cummins explained the types of efforts offered in the U.S. to secure and/or dispose of radiological sources.  Cummins then discussed various types of cooperation the United States engaged in with other countries and explained how the U.S. would like to initiate radiological security cooperation with Pakistan.  Examples of these activities include, but are not limited to, physical protection upgrades at radioactive source user facilities, transportation security upgrades, and disused or orphaned source recoveries.  Hashmi was immediately receptive to these ideas but stressed that cooperation would depend on the approval of the Foreign Affairs Ministry.  (Note:  The delegation raised the possibility of this cooperation in the Hyder meeting at the Foreign Ministry and received a positive response.  End Note.)  18.  (S/NF) Hashmi stated that he would prefer this type of engagement be routed through the International Atomic Energy Agency, but that strictly bilateral cooperation was possible.  The Chairman suggested the two sides begin drafting a Memorandum of Understanding to be signed in October/November 2007 on the margins of an International Atomic Energy Agency training course; the Chairman also suggested the two sides develop a two-year action plan.  On Atomic Energy Agency involvement, Energy representatives explained that the Office of Global Threat Reduction typically works bilaterally, but that it has worked with the Atomic Energy Agency on training and other activities and would remain open to various options for cooperative work.  Pakistan proposed that Chairman Hashmi meet with Energy officials in Washington, DC, in early May. The U.S. delegation proposed Christopher Landers return to Islamabad in mid-June to hold further detailed discussions regarding the two-year action plan and work with Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Agency officials on moving the Memorandum of Understanding forward to allow for signature in October 2007.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/20/2007 11:15", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001780  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY:  THE SUPREME COURT SET TO TAKE CENTER STAGE   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  In an April 20 meeting, Aitzaz Ahsan, lead counsel for non-functioning Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, updated poloffs on the legal proceedings against his client.  On April 18, Aitzaz appeared before the Supreme Judicial Council hearing Chaudhry's case and demanded that three justices on the Council recuse themselves due to conflicts of interest. (Note:  One judge will become Chief Justice in six months if Chaudhry is removed from the court; one will be a candidate to fill the vacant seat; and one has been previously disciplined by Chaudhry.  End Note.)  The judges refused move the recusal petition to the top of the list of motions it was hearing.  Believing it would be inimical to his client's interests for the Council to rule on other questions prior to ruling on the recusal motion, Aitzaz left the Council chambers and filed a petition with the Supreme Court of Pakistan.  The petition, on which Aitzaz and his staff have worked for weeks, includes 132 constitutional questions, from the constitutionality of the makeup of the Council to conflicts of interest involving Council members.  (Persons who wish to receive an electronic copy of the petition should e-mail DohertyRT@State.gov.)  THINGS TO WATCH  2.  (C)  --On April 19, the Supreme Court delivered a copy of the petition to President Musharraf, who is named as the respondent in the matter.  The President has not announced who will represent him before the Supreme Court, though the prevailing wisdom is it will be the Attorney General.  --According to Aitzaz, press reports that the Court might deny the petition are inaccurate.  While the Registrar of the Court reportedly told some journalists that the petition was unacceptable, he has no authority to thwart the petition.  --The Supreme Court is scheduled to hear the petitioner and the respondent on April 24.  Aitzaz expects the government may ask for more time.  --While the Supreme Judicial Council proceedings will continue, at least for the time being, Aitzaz noted that the Supreme Court case will take precedence.  He expects the Council to greatly reduce its activity while the Supreme Court works on the Chief Justice's petition.  All Supreme Court hearings will be in open court, and the petition itself is a public document.  CHANGES IN STREET TACTICS  3.  (C)  Aitzaz told poloffs that, as the weather becomes hotter, organizers will call for fewer protests outside the Supreme Court building.  Instead, Chaudhry will appear at rallies around the country. He is scheduled to speak in Peshawar on April 21, and in Faisalabad later in the week. Aitzaz anticipates large crowds at these events.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE48864", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/20/2007 11:52", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 001781  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2017 TAGS: ETTC, PARM, PREL, MTCRE SUBJECT: SANCTIONS DEMARCHE DELIVERED  REF: STATE 48864  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d )  1.  (S/NF) On April 20, Post delivered reftel points to Kamran Akhtar, Director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Disarmament Cell.  Akhtar noted that although Arif Durrani - the referenced individual being sanctioned under the Iran and Syria Nonproliferation Act - is a Pakistani citizen, the Pakistan government has never had any association with him. Akhtar hoped any U.S. statement on the matter could explicitly note Durrani's lack of ties to the Government of Pakistan.  Akhtar noted that information about Durrani available on the internet showed he had lived in the United States or Mexico since the early 1980s. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/20/2007 11:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001783  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY:  THE SUPREME COURT SET TO TAKE CENTER STAGE   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  In an April 20 meeting, Aitzaz Ahsan, lead counsel for non-functioning Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, updated poloffs on the legal proceedings against his client.  On April 18, Aitzaz appeared before the Supreme Judicial Council hearing Chaudhry's case and demanded that three justices on the Council recuse themselves due to conflicts of interest. (Note:  One judge will become Chief Justice in six months if Chaudhry is removed from the court; one will be a candidate to fill the vacant seat; and one has been previously disciplined by Chaudhry.  End Note.)  The judges refused move the recusal petition to the top of the list of motions it was hearing.  Believing it would be inimical to his client's interests for the Council to rule on other questions prior to ruling on the recusal motion, Aitzaz left the Council chambers and filed a petition with the Supreme Court of Pakistan.  The petition, on which Aitzaz and his staff have worked for weeks, includes 132 constitutional questions, from the constitutionality of the makeup of the Council to conflicts of interest involving Council members.  (Persons who wish to receive an electronic copy of the petition should e-mail DohertyRT@State.gov.)  THINGS TO WATCH  2.  (C)  --On April 19, the Supreme Court delivered a copy of the petition to President Musharraf, who is named as the respondent in the matter.  The President has not announced who will represent him before the Supreme Court, though the prevailing wisdom is it will be the Attorney General.  --According to Aitzaz, press reports that the Court might deny the petition are inaccurate.  While the Registrar of the Court reportedly told some journalists that the petition was unacceptable, he has no authority to thwart the petition.  --The Supreme Court is scheduled to hear the petitioner and the respondent on April 24.  Aitzaz expects the government may ask for more time.  --While the Supreme Judicial Council proceedings will continue, at least for the time being, Aitzaz noted that the Supreme Court case will take precedence.  He expects the Council to greatly reduce its activity while the Supreme Court works on the Chief Justice's petition.  All Supreme Court hearings will be in open court, and the petition itself is a public document.  CHANGES IN STREET TACTICS  3.  (C)  Aitzaz told poloffs that, as the weather becomes hotter, organizers will call for fewer protests outside the Supreme Court building.  Instead, Chaudhry will appear at rallies around the country. He is scheduled to speak in Peshawar on April 21, and in Faisalabad later in the week. Aitzaz anticipates large crowds at these events.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07KABUL1345", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/20/2007 12:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001786  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: TENSIONS FLARE OVER FENCING:  UPDATE FROM PAKISTAN  REF: KABUL 1345  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  Pakistan Military contacts confirm that the April 19 Pakistan Military-Afghan National Army confrontation over the location of the Shkin-Angor Adda area fence transpired as reported reftel.  Pakistan Military officials were unable to meet with Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan officials on April 20 but will meet with them on April 21.  2.  (C)  Pakistan Military contacts report that the fence location question is \"on hold\" until President Musharraf and President Karzai meet in Turkey on April 30.  National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz told Charge midday April 20 that no Afghan or Pakistani officials have attempted to contact him to discuss the incident.  The first Aziz knew of the tensions was from press accounts on April 19th.  In his conversation with Aziz, Charge raised the points that the Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs discussed with Ambassador Durrani on April 19. Aziz said he would follow up on the matter. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/23/2007 12:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001813  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/22/2017 TAGS: AF, MARR, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: GENERAL PASHA ON FENCE CONFRONTATION  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  MG Helmly, Chief, Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan, met on April 21 with MG Ahmad Pasha, Pakistan Military Director General of Operations, to discuss the April 19 confrontation between Afghan Army and Pakistan Army troops near Angor Adda and Shkin.  MG Helmly complimented Pasha on the maturity and self-control of the Pakistani forces and their leaders during the incident, during which the Pakistanis responded to Afghan fire with only warning shots.  2.  (C)  According to Pasha:  --While Pakistan has agreed to suspend all surveys on the fence's possible route until after President Karzai and Musharraf meet April 29 in Turkey, Musharraf is still committed to fencing three parts of the border, including Angor Adda.  --The Pakistan Military chose Angor Adda as one of the areas to fence because of the high volume of border crossings in the region and the frequency of miscreant activity there. Pasha described the proposed Angor Adda fence as a tool to funnel people to formal border crossings.  --Pakistan placed the survey flags that precipitated the confrontation in order to aid participants in the eventual Pakistan/Afghanistan/U.S. military terrain walk.  The Pakistan Military hoped the flags would make it easier to visualize Pakistan's proposed fence route.  --Pakistan still wants to go ahead with a terrain walk in order try to reach consensus on the fence's location before proceeding on constructing the fence.  -- After the April 19 incident, Pasha's Afghan counterpart, MG Karimi, told Pasha the ANA had not received any orders to interfere with the fencing.  --Pasha said that President Musharraf had given the Pakistan Military great latitude on deciding the fence's route and the timing and modalities of construction.  Pasha inferred from his conversation with Karimi that President Karzai had not similarly empowered that ANA.  --Pasha bore no ill-will toward the ANA soldiers who fired at Pakistani troops.  He described the Afghan troops as inadequately educated and trained. Pasha used his conversation with MG Karimi as an opportunity to invite Afghanistan to send troops to Pakistan for any type of training Karimi believed would be valuable to the ANA. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1570", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/23/2007 13:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001815  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: IS, KPAL, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF OFFERS TO HELP ON ISRAEL-PALESTINIAN DISPUTE  REF: ISLAMABAD 1570  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  During an April 20 interview with the Al-Arabiya television network, President Musharraf offered to help ameliorate the Israel-Palestinian impasse any way he could. He volunteered to travel to Jerusalem if the parties involved thought it would be helpful.  His offer followed months of his and senior cabinet officials' warning us that televised images of violence in the West Bank and Gaza were feeding extremism and anti-Americanism in Pakistan.  In early April, Musharraf told visiting CENTCOM Commander Adm. Fallon that the Israel/Palestinian impasse was the \"core problem\" facing the Muslim world, including Pakistan.  Musharraf was not convinced Arab states fully recognized the degree to which problems in the Middle East were impacting non-Arab Muslim countries.  2.  (C)  (Background:  In 2005, Pakistan and Israel publicly acknowledged working to improve bilateral relations, and Pakistani Foreign Minister Kasuri met in Turkey with then Israeli Foreign Minister Sylvan Shalom.  The same year, President Musharraf addressed the annual AIPAC Conference in Washington.  As the security situation in Gaza deteriorated, any Pakistani outreach to Israel became strictly off-the-radar. End Background.)   3. (C) Comment:  Musharraf's offer to travel to Jerusalem apparently is part of his larger Middle East Initiative, designed to encourage moderate Muslim nations (Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Malaysia, Indonesia and Turkey) to play a more constructive role in lowering instability and sectarian strife emanating from Iraq, Lebanon, and Israel/Palestine.  Musharraf privately (protect) portrays the importance of stabilizing those areas as an existential issue for his administration.  Musharraf reportedly has encouraged a realistic approach to the Israel Palestinian question during his and other Pakistani officials' meetings with representatives of Muslim countries.  He complained to Adm. Fallon that some Arab states were failing to take Israel's needs and interests into account, exacerbating the Israel Palestinian problem. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1783", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/24/2007 13:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001833  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, ASEC SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY CONTINUES: APRIL 24 PROTESTS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1783       B. AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: CDA Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) Coinciding with the Supreme Judicial Council and Supreme Court hearings in Islamabad, demonstrations occurred around Pakistan on April 24. In a manner that has become routine since the Chief Justice controversy began in March, police established road blocks and barriers on all major avenues around the Supreme Court. In a new development, the protests in Islamabad involved over 1000 pro-government partcipants from the ruling Pakistan Muslim League-Q, many bused in from other cities in Punjab. The pro-government protestors were led by PML President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and other party notables. The overall numbers of protestors in Islamabad increased over last week, to approximately 7000 people. All major opposition parties took part, with the MMA, PPP, and PML-N drawing crowds of supporters and top party officials. Due to the growing heat in the capital, most protestors dispersed by 2 pm. The demonstrations were generally peaceful, with only a small skirmish between 20-30 pro-government and pro-Chief Justice protestors. (Note. The police kept pro- and anti-government protestors separated by barriers and had them march on separate streets. End Note.)  2. (C) Protests also took place in various cities around Pakistan.        --Protests in Lahore ended earlier than expected and were smaller than in the past, numbering only 1000 people. The MMA and PML-N were the main protestors in Lahore, with the PPP sending only token representation.        --In Karachi, lawyers led a march to the Sindh High Court and were joined by representatives of all major opposition parties. The 2000 - 2500 protestors were peaceful and well organized.        -- In Peshawar, lawyers staged a complete strike, refusing to attend court proceedings. A sizeable protest took place in Peshawar on Saturday, April 21, when the Chief Justice, his legal team, and thousands of supporters rallied at the NWFP High Court.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1783", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/24/2007 13:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001834  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY CONTINUES: THE HEARINGS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1783       B. AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affairs a.i. Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) a nd (d)  1. (U) On April 24, both the Supreme Court and the Supreme Judicial Council considered petitions relating to the presidential reference against the Chief Justice. In the Supreme Court, Presiding Justice Muhammad Raza Khan excused himself from considering the Chief Justice's petition.  Khan said he had recused himself -- despite pleas from both the Chief Justice's and the Government's attorneys not to -- because he had previously signed a restraining order against the Chief Justice.  2. (U) Sharifuddin Pirzada, an adviser to the Prime Minister and a leading constitutional lawyer, announced he will defend President Musharraf, the primary respondent in the Chief Justice's Supreme Court petition. Earlier, Pirzada had declined to represent the government at the Supreme Judicial Council and has expressed consternation over the way the President handled the Chief Justice reference.  3. (U) The Supreme Judicial Council also met on April 24. Counsel Aitzaz Ahsan argued against the composition of the Council and again demanded that three of the justices recuse themselves. The Council's next hearings will be May 2 and 3.  4.  (C) The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) ordered satellite television station Aaj TV to appear before PEMRA on April 25.  According to PEMRA's Show Cause order and to Embassy contacts, PEMRA is accusing Aaj of overly criticizing the Government's handling of the Chief Justice controversy; PEMRA is threatening to cancel Aaj TV's broadcasting license.  This apparently is the first time PEMRA has attempted to censor any reporting on the Chief Justice issue since PEMRA took GEO Television off the air for 20 minutes in early March.  After that incident, both President Musharraf and Minister of Information Durrani promised that the government would no longer censor television coverage of the controversy.  (Comment:  As in the earlier GEO incident, PEMRA may have acted without consulting the Government.  End Comment.)  5.  (U)  The Additional Advocate General of the Punjab announced on April 23 that he would resign his position to protest the government's handling of the Chief Justice case.        BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/25/2007 11:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001842  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S UPCOMING ELECTIONS, PART 1: STABILITY PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY TO PREPARE  REF: ISLAMABAD 1490 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (U) Pakistan's upcoming general elections -- expected to occur in late 2007 or early 2008 -- are a topic of frequent conversation and speculation among the country's elite, media, and international community (including recent U.S. Congressional delegations). When Pakistanis go to the polls they will elect members of the National and Provincial Assemblies -- not the President. The elections will be an important test of President Musharraf's stated goal of strengthening Pakistan's democratic institutions. Building public trust will be a crucial component of the process. This is the first in a series of cables describing preparations for Pakistan's elections. End Summary.  ----------------------------------- National and Provincial Assemblies: Completion of Terms Will Be A First -----------------------------------  2. (U) Pakistanis will go to the polls later this year or early next year to elect 342 members of the National Assembly and 483 members of the four Provincial Assemblies (Punjab, Sindh, Northwest Frontier, and Balochistan Provinces). Under the constitution, Assembly members are elected directly in a constituency-based, first-past-the-post (winner takes all) system except for special seats reserved for women and non-Muslims. Women and non-Muslims fill reserved seats according to a proportional, party list system based on the number of general seats won by their party. (Note: Pakistan's upper house of parliament, the Senate, consists of 100 members. Except for specially appointed representatives from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and the Capital Area, Senators are elected indirectly by the Provincial Assemblies. Senators serve staggered six-year terms, and elections are to be held every three years. The next election -- which will replace half of the Senate -- is due in 2009. End Note.)  3. (U) Pakistan's constitution mandates five-year terms for the National and Provincial Assemblies, but historically, Pakistan's Assemblies have been weak institutions. During the 1990's alone, the National and Provincial Assemblies were dissolved four times before President Musharraf suspended them in 1999. Musharraf frequently observes as a point of pride that the current National and Provincial Assemblies will be the first in Pakistan's history to complete their five-year term. The current National Assembly's term began November 16, 2002. All but one of the Provincial Assemblies also began in November 2002. Sindh Provinical Assembly, the last to convene, began its term in December 2002.  -------------------------------------------- How the President Will (Probably) Be Elected --------------------------------------------  4. (U) The Legal Framework Order of 2002 -- promulgated by Musharraf but later incorporated into the Constitution via the 17th Amendment in 2003 -- changed the electoral schedule for the National and Provincial Assemblies. Instead of holding elections before the end of their term, the amended schedule calls for elections to be held within 60 days after  ISLAMABAD 00001842  002 OF 002   the expiration of their term. This means that elections should be scheduled sometime between November 15, 2007 and January 15, 2008.  5. (U) The Legal Framework Order did not change the schedule for Presidential elections, however. When a President's term is set to expire, the Constitution calls for the Chief Election Commissioner to convene an Electoral College composed of both houses Parliament and the Provincial Assemblies to elect a President no earlier than 60 days and no later than 30 days before the expiration of the President's term. President Musharraf's term is set to expire on November 15, which means that the Electoral College should convene sometime between September 15 and October 15.  6. (U) According to the new constitutional schedule, Musharraf will stand for re-election as president using the current Assemblies unless he dissolves them before the presidential election is due. Opposition parties have criticized Musharraf for this state of affairs, claiming that possibly not allowing the new Assemblies to choose a new President goes against the spirit of the constitution. Had the old Constitutional schedule been in place, Musharraf definitely would have stood for re-election using the newly elected Assemblies. Critics call the possible new schedule a \"fraud on the Constitution,\" claiming that the constitutional process itself was subverted with the passage of the controversial 17th Amendment. (Note: On the other hand, since no Assembly in Pakistan's history as a republic has ever finished its five-year term, the old constitutional schedule had never been exercised. End Note.)  7. (U) No date has yet been announced for the presidential election, but Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz and other government officials have indicated repeatedly to the press, including as recently as April 22, that Musharraf will seek re-election from the current Assemblies.  ----------------------------------- The Challenge: Gaining Public Trust -----------------------------------  8. (C) Comment: On at least one score, President Musharraf has already succeeded in his declared goal of strengthening democratic institutions. By allowing the Assemblies to complete their five-year terms Musharraf has provided enough stability to allow the international community to work with the government, political parties, and civil society to plan for and run better parliamentary elections. Subsequent cables will describe these activities -- and inherent challenges -- in more detail.  9. (C) Comment, cont.: The most recent International Republican Institute-sponsored poll in February/March 2007 indicated that most people surveyed (82 percent) said they would vote if elections for the National Assembly were held next week. The survey also showed -- not for the first time -- that the Election Commission of Pakistan held the second lowest institutional approval rating in Pakistan (47 percent). For the next round of general elections to be deemed credible, this percentage will have to increase. This is a more challenging task, but improved government engagement with civil society, political parties, and ordinary people could go a long way toward building much-needed public trust. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/25/2007 12:22", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001844  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CHAUDHRY SHUJAAT WORRIED ABOUT PML'S SITUATION   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  Pakistan Muslim League (PML-Q) President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain told us April 25 he was worried that the ongoing Chief Justice controversy was harming his party's political situation.  He described the opposition's ability to generate excitement over the Chief Justice's plight as a growing phenomenon.  The PML-Q was particularly concerned by the large crowds the Chief Justice drew during his April 21 rally in Peshawar.  While Shujaat in no way believed Musharraf was in imminent poltical danger, he did worry that the Chief Justice matter was distracting the PML-Q from preparing for the general election that will occur in the next eight months.  Shujaat had \"strongly counseled\" President Musharraf to find a way to end the Chief Justice controversy.  While not enumerating, Shujaat said advisors would soon propose a strategy for ending the legal proceedings against the Chief Justice in a way that would save everyone's honor, especially the Chief Justice's and President Musharraf's.  2.  (C)  Other points:  --According to Shujaat, a significant number of PML-Q political leaders and PML-Q-associated politicians, particularly those who joined PML-Q from the PPP and PML-Nawaz, are refusing to support the President in the Chief Justice matter.  Shujaat suspects people are \"fence sitting\" so that they can move to the PPP if Musharraf's political fortunes sag.  (Note:  On the other hand, a PPP leader told us last week that the PPP was concerned because it had not yet seen expected defections from PML-Q over the Chief Justice issue.  End Note.)  --Some of President Musharraf's advisors recommended that the President cancel this week's trip to Europe so he could stay home and focus on his political problems. The President replied that the trip was too important, but said he would focus on politics when he returned.  --Shujaat said the PML-Q planned to announce a major political rally in Islamabad for Saturday, May 12.  The Punjab PML-Q hopes to bus in 200,000 supporters for the rally, which will take place on Constitution Avenue, in front of the Supreme Court.  Shujaat stressed the importance of proving that PML-Q could activate 200,000 or more supporters for the event.  3.  (C)  COMMENT: We stress that Shujaat does not believe Musharraf's political position is in imminent danger.  Nor does Shujaat believe that any political harm accrued through the Chief Justice controversy is permanent.  Shujaat's job is to worry about politics and to ensure the PML-Q does well in the next election; he would not be fulfilling his responsibilities if he were not concerned over a matter such as this.  What has yet to be seen is if President Musharraf shares Shujaat's conviction that the Chief Justice question must be resolved sooner rather than later.  End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "4/25/2007 12:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001846  SIPDIS  ////COLLECTIVE ADDED/////////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE (LAL MASJID) STAND-OFF OFFICIALLY OVER  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1647       B. ISLAMABAD 1688      C. ISLAMABAD 1698  ISLAMABAD 00001846  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  The stand-off between the Government and the Jamia Hafsa women's madrassa officially ended the night of April 24.  Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain toured the madrassa and confirmed the students there had met all the government's demands.  The government, in turn, agreed not to destroy more mosques without first consulting with affected communities and agreed to \"enforce sharia law,\" which in this controversy has become a euphemism for anti-vice and anti-pornography laws. Musharraf's and Shujaat's willingness to ignore daily calls from opposition parties and from the press to \"enforce the writ of the state\" ultimately allowed the crisis to end without bloodshed.  End Summary.  THE STAND-OFF OFFICIALLY ENDS  2.  (C)   Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain told us April 25 that all outstanding disagreements between the women of Jamia Hafsa and the Government of Pakistan were resolved.  Shujaat had toured the madrassa the night before and seen no men, militants, weapons, or swagger sticks (batons).  He also confirmed that the children's library adjacent to the madrassa -- site of a months-long sit-in -- was open to the public.  In short, the madrassa had met all of the government's demands.  3.  (C)  Shujaat complained that the press had sensationalized and misreported the Red Mosque story from the beginning.  Coverage of the controversy's denouement was no different.  Headlines claimed that the government had agreed to \"enforce sharia law,\" but what the women had actually demanded was enforcement of existing laws against pornography, prostitution, and other crimes.  WHO'S INSIDE THE MADRASSA  4.  (C)  Shujaat told us he was shocked by the number of children and teenagers in the madrassa.  He claimed that the security and police services, when briefing him on possible methods of ending the stand-off through force, had not reported the significant number of children in the building. Shujaat had spoken to many of the girls during his tour; most of them were orphans or children of destitute parents.  SHUJAAT:  THE GOVERNMENT CAUSED THIS UNNECESSARILY  5.  (C)  Shujaat said he would not represent the government again in negotiations with the madrassa or mosque.  He believed the government had behaved \"stupidly\" from the beginning of the crisis.  The precipitating event of the stand-off -- the government's demolition of mosques built without permits -- should not have occurred without consulting the affected communities, especially since some of the mosques had been built decades earlier.  Shujaat also complained about the April 16 low-level helicopter surveillance of the mosque, which had offended the residents' conservative sensibilities.  Shujaat suspected that, in both cases, relatively junior decision makers had acted rashly in an effort to \"stand up to the mullahs.\"  Senior government officials would have been more circumspect, according to Shujaat.   THE LAW AND ORDER VACUUM -- AND WHAT FILLS IT  6.  (C)  Shujaat noted that the entire Jamia Hafsa saga was a metaphor for the law and order problems facing Pakistan.  The  ISLAMABAD 00001846  002.2 OF 002   press criticized the government's failure to enforce the writ of the state inside the madrassa and mosque, but the cause of the controversy's escalation was the state's refusal to enforce basic laws in the mosque's neighborhood.  (Note:  On March 27, Jamia Hafsa women kidnapped three prostitutes and a child from a brothel near the Red Mosque and held the kidnapees in the madrassa for several days.  The madrassa students told the press they took action only after the police repeatedly told mosque officials they would not shut down the brothel, which was located on a small street of tiny row houses.  About 40 families lived on the street, and all had signed petitions requesting the police close the brothel; the police had also ignored those petitions.  End Note.)  7.  (C)  While he was visiting Jamia Hafsa, Shujaat met with two women who recently took refuge in the mosque.  The two, aged 17 and 19, were raped two months ago by an \"influential man\" in Jelhum, Punjab.  After the police refused to file charges against the rapist, the girls fled to Jamia Hafsa . The madrassa has since issued press releases noting the failure of the state to seek justice.  Shujaat met with the two young women on April 24.  He confidentially told us that the older one is pregnant from the rape.  During his meeting with us, he returned to the young women's plight several times, and was clearly upset by the situation.  As we left, he told us he was working on \"making sure the state seeks justice for those girls.\"  8.  (C)  Comment:  Shujaat has a reputation for being the PML-Q's ruthless political enforcer.  Throughout the Red Mosque controversy, though, we have found him to be concerned about the well-being of the girls and women inside the madrassa and committed first and foremost to resolving the stand-off with no violence.  The press -- which has been sensationalist and less-than-transparent throughout this saga -- may very well report tomorrow that Shujaat \"caved to the mullahs\" by agreeing to reexamine the mosque destruction issue and by promising to enforce anti-vice laws. The reality, though, is that President Musharraf's and Shujaat's waiting out the controversy averted a potential human tragedy and political crisis. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE55436", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/2/2007 4:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001943  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR PM/RSAT AND SCA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/01/2017 TAGS: MARR, MASS, MOPS, PREL, PTER, PK, IZ SUBJECT: PAKISTAN UNLIKELY TO CONTRIBUTE TO IRAQ MISSION EXCEPT UNDER UN MANDATE  REF: STATE 55436  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C)  Post assesses that Pakistan would not be willing to contribute troops or other support to the current Iraq Coalition, nor would it be productive to raise the matter with the Government of Pakistan at this time.  2. (C) Pakistani officials have intimated privately in the past that they would consider sending troops to Iraq at some future date as part of a UN peacekeeping operation. Pakistan's standard conditions for contributing troops to UN missions include a UN (preferably Security Council) mandate, consent of the host country, and troop utilization for \"peacekeeping\" rather than \"peace enforcement\" purposes.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ANKARA1029|07KABUL1506", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/3/2007 13:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 001994  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/03/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, AF, PGOV SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF AND KARZAI IN ANKARA: AN INTERIM REACTION FROM PAKISTAN  REF: A. KABUL 01506      B. ANKARA 01029  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, For Reasons 1.4 (b) and ( d)  1.  (C) Summary:  Working-level contacts at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs told us May 3 that the April 30 meeting between Presidents Musharraf, Karzai, and Sezer reinforced Pakistan and Afghanistan's common commitment to fighting the Taliban.  The meeting also presented opportunities to further institutionalize bilateral dialogue between the two countries.  Post has numerous meeting requests pending with senior Government of Pakistan officials as well as the Turkish Ambassador.  Post will provide a more complete readout after these meetings.  End Summary.  2.  (C) On May 3, Amir Shaukat, Director for Afghanistan at the Foreign Ministry, noted that the two sides had arrived in Ankara without having negotiated a joint statement (the Ankara Declaration) in advance.  In a day and a half, Shaukat stressed, the Pakistani and Afghan teams drafted a joint statement that included important references to intelligence sharing and repatriation of Afghan refugees.  Shaukat also noted Turkey's involvement in engaging Pakistan and Afghanistan was especially welcome for two reasons:  Pakistan and Afghanistan both enjoyed good relations with Turkey; and Turkey's participation offered leaders of both nations a new forum in which to forge common understandings on sensitive issues.  Turkey, Shaukat said, was a moderate Muslim country more acceptable to the public as a broker on Afghan/Pakistani issues than some western nations.  3.  (C) Press reaction indicates that, whatever Musharraf's demeanor in private, he said positive things in public, fueling a generally supportive reaction to the Ankara meeting in Pakistan.  On the flight back to Islamabad, Musharraf told journalists his meeting with Karzai was productive; that he hoped the Ankara Declaration would help bring an end to the public blame-game between the two leaders.  Post spoke with leading members of the Pakistani press, who noted Musharraf's positive public posture but also questioned whether Karzai would ever \"admit part of the responsibility\" for the insurgency in Afghanistan.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1834", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/4/2007 12:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002017  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE UPDATE-- MAY 4  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1834       B. ISLAMABAD 1833      C. ISLAMABAD 1783      D. ISLAMABAD 1659  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  ------------ Legal Update ------------  1. (C) The legal process to decide the fate of Pakistan's Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry has split into two concurrent tracks -- one in the Supreme Court and the other in the Supreme Judicial Council.  Both bodies resumed hearings May 2 and 3 on the reference against the Chief Justice.  Acting Chief Justice Bhagwandas constituted a five-member bench of the Supreme Court to hear petitions from both sides.  The petition by the Chief Justice's lead counsel Aitzaz Ahsan (ref C) has attracted the most attention -- it challenges the Supreme Judicial Council's legality and competence.  The government, for its part, argued that the full Supreme Court should hear the petition rather than Bhagwandas' five-member bench.  (Note: The government likely feels that the five-member bench is composed of junior justices more sympathetic to Chief Justice Chaudhry than the full court would be. End note.)  The Supreme Court will reconvene May 7 to continue hearing petitions.  2. (C) Meanwhile on May 3, Ahsan completed his opening statements and arguments on all preliminary objections before the Supreme Judicial Council.  Ahsan wanted the Council to dismiss proceedings for two weeks so the Supreme Court could decide on his petition.  (Note: The Chief Justice considers the Supreme Judicial Council invalid and does not want it to decide on the reference against him.  End note.)  However, the Council rejected this request and will move ahead with hearing the reference against Chief Justice Chaudhry.  The Supreme Judicial Council proceedings will resume on May 9 and 10.  -------------- Demonstrations --------------  3. (SBU) The now-routine protests of lawyers and opposition parties took place on May 2 and 3, with an estimated turnout of 3400 participants in Islamabad each day. Isolated confrontations led to some injuries over the two days. On May 2, protesting lawyers attacked one Musharraf supporter. On May 3, as Chief Justice Chaudhry attempted to enter the Supreme Court through the Judge's Gate, police restrained the accompanying mass of lawyers and told them to go through the main gate. The lawyers forced the gate open and the ensuing 15-minute scuffle resulted in 10 injured persons, including policemen. On the same day, some journalists also attacked what they termed \"lawyer impersonators\", after these \"impersonators\" prevented their access to the Supreme Court.  ------------------- May 5 Rally Planned -------------------  4. (SBU) Chief Justice Chaudhry has announced he will lead a large number of lawyers by road to Lahore on May 5. Organizers plan for supporters to line sections of the 162 mile route. Once in Lahore, Chaudhry is scheduled to address a large rally. On May 3, the Secretary of the Interior asked the Chief Justice to travel by air to Lahore for his own safety, citing the danger of terrorist attacks or suicide bombings. Counsel Aitzaz Ahsan responded that his client was determined to travel by land. To counter rumors that the police would set up barriers to bar Chaudhry's progress to  ISLAMABAD 00002017  002 OF 002   Lahore, Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat told the press on May 4 that the government has no plan to stop Chief Justice Chaudhry's trip.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/5/2007 9:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002023  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/02/2017 TAGS: PTER, KTFN, EFIN, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: SINDH HIGH COURT RULES IN FAVOR OF AL RASHID TRUST  Classified By: Acting Deputy Chief of Mission James Williams for Reason s 1.4(b) and (d)   1.  (SBU)  Summary: On April 26, the Sindh High Court (SHC) suspended the Pakistan government's decision to freeze the assets of Al Rashid Trust (ART) and seal its offices.  The two-member bench, which included the Chief Justice, ruled there was no justification for the closing of the offices. This is an interim ruling.  The court reconvenes on May 15 for further hearings on the case.  For now, the court has directed the government to partially lift the ban so that ART will be able to distribute perishable food items and drugs to the earthquake-affected areas.  ART stated they are contemplating creating another charity in order to \"avoid a repetition of past events.\"  End Summary.  2.  (C) On April 26, the Sindh High Court (SHC) issued an order suspending the government's action of February 18, 2007 that froze the assets and closed the offices of Al Rashid Trust (ART), as required by UNSCR 1267.  This is an interim order, however it has an immediate, nationwide affect.  This allows ART access to its perishable food and medicine in order to distribute them to the earthquake-affected areas. The court also directed ART to distribute the goods through another charitable organization as the UN order forbids ART involvement.  ART stated they would use Al Amin Welfare Trust.  They also informed a local newspaper they were now considering forming a new charity in order to \"avoid a repetition of past events.\" (Note:  Embassy is seeking meetings with Finance Ministry and Social Welfare Ministry officials on GOP's action plan to keep ART's assets frozen and offices closed. End Note).  3.  (C)  The SHC will reconvene on May 15 to more fully examine the matter.  It is likely that they will again find in favor of ART.  In January 2006, this same court overturned a similar move by the GOP to freeze the assets and close the offices of ART.  At issue is whether UN obligations trump domestic Pakistani law.  The 2006 decision has been appealed to the Supreme Court, but post sees no movement toward an expeditious adjudication.  4 (C) Comment: The government appealed the 2006 decision and presumably will appeal this one as well. The GOP may be reluctant, however, to press the Supreme Court to hear the case while the Supreme Court and the Supreme Judicial Council are hearing the reference against the Chief Justice.  End Comment BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2017", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/7/2007 12:39", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002033  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/07/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT SUSPENDS SUPREME JUDICIAL COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS  REF: ISLAMABAD 2017 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) On May 7, Pakistan's Supreme Court ordered the Supreme Judicial Council (the ad hoc body hearing evidence against Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry since March) to suspend proceedings against the Chief Justice.  The suspension will stay in force while the Supreme Court considers several petitions concerning the Supreme Judicial Council, including whether the Council's composition is constitutional and whether three members of the Council should recuse themselves for conflict of interest.  Aitzaz Ahsan, the Chief Justice's lead counsel, had petitioned the Supreme Court to suspend the Supreme Judicial Council while the court decides the outstanding petitions.  2. (C) In what some observers consider an attempt to exhibit impartiality, the Supreme Court also acceded to a request from the government's lawyers that the Court expand to a \"full bench\" (9-11 judges) for all matters concerning the Chief Justice, rather than the current five-judge bench.  3.  (C)  Comment:  Rumors have circulated for weeks that, should the Supreme Court suspend the Council's proceedings, the Government might use the suspension as an opportunity to withdraw the reference against the Chief Justice.  In such a scenario, the government would announce that it did not wish to see the entire Supreme Court tied up for months on only one issue while other important legal questions were held in abeyance.  Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat told us last week that he indeed was eager to end the controversy in a way that would save the honor of both sides.  While many other PML members tell us they also want the Chief Justice issue to resolve itself sooner rather than later, some of President Musharraf's interviews over the weekend indicated that he still feels strongly that Chaudhry does not belong on the bench.  We will see a number of senior PML leaders over the next few days and will report after those meetings on the most likely next steps for the PML. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1846", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/8/2007 19:24", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002067  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/08/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF'S CHANGED POLITICAL SITUATION: LESS LATITUDE BUT STILL IN CONTROL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1846       B. ISLAMABAD 1844  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (S)  Two months in, observers, including some of President Musharraf's main supporters and advisors, believe that the Chief Justice controversy has inflicted political harm on the President.  Musharraf's political position is now more fragile.  We continue to agree with the prevailing informed opinion - held across the political spectrum - that the government is not in any immediate danger of falling. That said, Musharraf's advisors tell us the President cannot afford further setbacks until the Chief Justice issue is resolved.  2.  (S)  A number of Members of the National Assembly and Senators from the ruling Pakistan Muslim League tell us they are reluctant to support President Musharraf publicly.  Some are even refusing to appear at a May 12 pro-Musharraf rally in Islamabad.  Sheikh Waqqas Akram, Parliamentary Secretary for Economic Affairs, is one of the few PML officials still vociferously supporting Musharraf.  Akram, who is in his 30s and new to the Assembly, told us on May 7 that Musharraf's most important political supporters have publicly distanced themselves from the President.  While Akram is optimistic he and others will be able to ensure a sizable turnout for the May 12 rally, the event will draw far fewer than the 200,000 protesters PML President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain had hoped for (Ref B).  3.  (S)  Musharraf's problems with his supporters are not ideological; they are purely political.  The weaker the President appears politically, the more people around him hedge their bets by fence-sitting or even hinting they might jump to another party.  (Note:  Likewise, should the President rebound from his current political position by finding a publicly acceptable resolution to the Chief Justice controversy, his supporters would likely quickly return to his side.  End Note.)  Musharraf is being exceptionally cautious.  His sensitive handling of the Red Mosque controversy (Ref A), while largely influenced by the moral imperative of not causing the deaths of women and girls, was also an acknowledgment that, while he has weathered storms of collateral damage and civilian deaths before, he felt he would be less able to withstand significant public outcry in his present circumstance.  4.  (S)  Musharraf's political opponents are also speaking about the President's predicament - and sometimes with more worry than glee.  Abdullah Riar, a former Senator and a confidante of Benazir Bhutto, told us May 8 that the protesters at the May 5 demonstrations in Lahore were chanting \"While GHQ (Army headquarters) is doing its plundering, you and I go hungry.\"  While Riar did not worry about another coup, he did worry that the Army could quietly pull its important political support from Musharraf if the Army believed association with Musharraf hurt its image. (Note:  Based on our close contact with a wide range of the Pakistan military, we believe Musharraf's support from the military remains strong.  End Note.)  5.  (S)  Many circles are providing Musharraf advice. Culture Minister GG Jamal told us May 8 he has told the President that a major pro-democracy move, such as removing his uniform, would extinguish the Chief Justice controversy overnight.  Others, such as Shujaat and Musharraf's legal advisors, have encouraged a face-saving compromise with the Chief Justice.  Akram, the young PML Member of the National Assembly, admits some in the party are examining the possibility of declaring a state of emergency and postponing elections, though most Musharraf supporters say that such a  ISLAMABAD 00002067  002 OF 002   move would be a \"disaster\" for Musharraf, both internationally and with his core constituency.  Musharraf himself has told us he would only ever consider a state of emergency if a major regional incident, such as a war in Iran, were to occur.  6.  (S)  Comment:  Musharraf's people are worried.  While some of the current political maneuvering can be attributed to the predictable dynamics of South Asian politics, Musharraf's advisors believe he cannot afford another political misstep as they move into campaign season - not to mention into the hot summer months that historically increase public frustration with Pakistan's widespread electricity and water shortages.  In addition, given Musharraf's close association with us, United States activities (such as statements of senior U.S. officials, Legislative actions, and military activities), which are always closely scrutinized, will have an even greater impact than usual.  It is, perhaps, ironic, that some of Musharraf's greatest accomplishments - a relatively free press, a developing civil society, and a booming economy - have enabled public outcry over the Chief Justice issue.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE51828", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/10/2007 3:12", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002083  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, UNSC, KPKO, PK, SU SUBJECT: DARFUR MISSION DEMARCHE: PAKISTAN WOULD NEED TO ASSESS SITUATION BEFORE COMMITTING TROOPS  REF: STATE 51828  1. (SBU) On May 7, Charge d'Affaires delivered reftel demarche to Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan, urging Pakistan to make a public commitment of troops and police for the future UN/AU hybrid operation.  In response, Khan referred to Pakistan's clear, longstanding policy regarding its peacekeeping operations -- it will only commit forces if there is consensus in the destination country to receive the deployment.  2. (SBU) Khan mentioned the example of Sierra Leone, where Pakistan first sent an advance mission to assess the situation on the ground.  This mission consulted with both the government and opposition before deciding that an agreement between the two was tenable.  Only then did Pakistan commit several thousand peacekeeping troops to Sierra Leone.  Khan said that Pakistan would first have to send a mission to Darfur before committing to participate in a peacekeeping operation there.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1994", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/10/2007 12:52", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 002107  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/10/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK, AF SUBJECT: FOREIGN SECRETARY AND TURKISH AMBASSADOR REFLECT ON ANKARA TRILATERAL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 1994       B. KABUL 1506  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (S) Summary.  Charge d'Affaires met with Pakistan Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan May 7 and Turkisk Ambassador Engin Soysal  SIPDIS May 8 to hear their reflections on the April 29-30 Pakistan-Afghanistan-Turkey trilateral in Ankara.  Both Khan and Soysal were in Ankara for the meetings -- Khan as the undersecretary-level negotiator and Soysal advising the Prime Minister on Pakistan.  Both reported that the atmosphere between Musharraf and Karzai was tense at the outset, despite a very positive and collaborative spirit at the working level.  Musharraf did deliver a long, \"frank\" response to Karzai's opening statement.  Musharraf took Karzai to task when he admitted to harboring Balochistan separatists, but the summit ended on a more positive note, with commitments to stop the \"blame game\", hold another summit in late 2007/early 2008, and form a Joint Working Group on substantive issues. Soysal concluded that Turkey was satisfied with the trilateral's outcome but that building on this momentum through the Joint Working Group on border issues and economic ties would be a challenge.  End summary.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ Foreign Secretary Khan briefs Charge on Ankara Trilateral --------------------------------------------- ------------  2. (C) At a May 7 meeting with Charge d'Affaires, Pakistan's Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan gave a read out of the April 29-30 Pakistan-Afghanistan-Turkey trilateral in Ankara.  Khan traveled with President Musharraf's delegation and negotiated the joint statement (the Anakara Declaration) after the April 29 dinner. (Note: Khan said \"nothing of substance\" occurred at the dinner. End note.)  Musharraf briefed Khan and the rest of the delegation after the April 30 summit meeting with President Karzai, President Sezer, and Prime Minister Erdogan.  3. (C) Khan said that Musharraf ceded the floor to Karzai at the beginning of the meeting because Karzai had initiated the trilateral by suggestng it to Erdogan last year.  Karzai led off by saying that Pakistan and Afghanistan should realize the common threats they faced and leave some of the issues between them in the past.  Khan quoted Karzai as saying \"we're brothers\".  Karzai alluded to Islamabad's fear of a \"Pashtunistan\" as one such issue to leave behind.  (Note: Pashtun nationalists use this term to refer to Pakistan's Pashtun-majority border areas that wanted independence from Pakistan at the time of partition from India. End note.)  --------------------------------------------- ----- Musharraf: Afghanistan's problems come from within --------------------------------------------- -----  4. (C) Khan described Musharraf's \"long monologue\" response as \"frank\".  Musharraf began by asking: \"Where is the problem?\"  He explained that Pakistan has long suffered the fall-out from problems originating in Afghanistan and has helped millions of Afghan refugees.  Musharraf argued that Karzai's simplified portrayal of Pakistan as the source of Afghanistan's problems was wrong -- the problems must also be addressed \"over there\" in Afghanistan.  He then dismissed the outdated notion that Pakistan is worried about a possible \"Pashtunistan\".  He added that if Karzai really thought that Pakistan wanted to destabilize and dominate Afghanistan, then there was little use in having this type of discussion.  5. (S) Musharraf raised the issue of Afghanistan giving refuge to Balochistan separatists.  Karzai conceded that such people were in Afghanistan.  He said he had approached the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) to ask what would happen  ISLAMABAD 00002107  002 OF 003   if the separatists were returned to Pakistan.  The response from UNHCR was unclear, so Afghanistan decided to keep them. Musharraf replied that Afghanistan had denied the presence of Baloch separatist leaders when he had raised the issue before.  He told Karzai that this turnaround exemplified how \"you say something but don't mean it on the ground.\"  -------------------------------------- Positive ending: Stop the \"blame game\" --------------------------------------  6. (C) Khan said that Musharraf closed by stating that Pakistan and Afghanistan should have very good relations and by quoting the famous Islamic poet Muhammad Iqbal: \"If there is strife in Afghanistan, there will be strife in Asia, and if there is peace in Afghanistan, Asia too will be at peace.\"  Khan said that by the end of the meeting, Musharraf and Karzai agreed they should stop the \"blame game\" and focus on cooperation.  Musharraf agreed to another Presidential meeting later in 2007 as well as the formation of a Joint Working Group of senior officials, leaving it to Turkey to make the arrangements.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Turkish Ambassador: \"Satisfactory\" result in Anakara --------------------------------------------- -------  7. (C) Charge met May 8 with Turkish Ambassador Engin Soysal to hear his version of what transpired in Ankara.  Soysal attended President Sezer's pre-meeting briefing, participated in the April 29 dinner and joint statement working session, and was actively involved in handling the Pakistani and Afghan delegations.  Soysal thanked Charge for the input and suggestions post provided him in advance of the summit, saying these were helpful.  8. (S) Turkey's two main objectives for the summit, according to Soysal, were to facilitate a productive Pak-Afghan dialogue in an unobtrusive manner (\"we didn't impose an agenda\") and to protect carefully its bilateral relationships with Pakistan and Afghanistan, depite the \"asymmetry\" between them. (Note: Soysal elaborated that Musharraf's relationship with Turkey is much closer than Karzai's. End note.)  Soysal said that by these measures, Ankara found the summit's final result \"satisfactory\".  9. (C) Despite the tepid mood between Musharraf and Karzai at the April 29 dinner, Soysal said that the atmosphere among the Pakistani and Afghan delegations at the foreign secretary level was \"excellent\".  This gave Soysal confidence about the prospects for the Joint Working Group moving forward.  Soysal observed that the two delegations were clearly on familiar terms and worked well together.  Each side had its own ideas about the joint statement (border monitoring and refugee repatriation being the main sticking points), but they resolved their differences cordially and agreed to another summit in late 2007 or early 2008.  Soysal described Turkey's presence at the table as \"calm,  helpful, and ready to accept whatever the two sides came up with.\"  Soysal felt that \"the U.S. can't be such a quiet presence in the room\" as Turkey.  10. (C) According to Soysal's briefing with President Sezer's advisor after the summit meeting, the atmosphere in the room was \"tense\" at the beginning.  He said the Turks' impression was that Musharraf -- after hearing the same generalities from Karzai he had heard often before -- spoke at length because he was far better prepared to discuss policy issues in detail.  Soysal said that the leaders appeared more relaxed at the lunch after the summit meeting, when the discussion revolved around foreign investment and privatization.   ISLAMABAD 00002107  003 OF 003   ----------------------------- Turkey committed to follow up -----------------------------  11. (C) Soysal said that Turkey \"thinks there is momentum\" coming out of the trilateral and is very serious about following up on the commitments coming out of the meeting. Turkey is looking for opportunities to encourage support for the Ankara Delcaration, including at NATO and the OIC. Soysal conceded that it will not be easy to get the Joint Working Group off the ground.  Turkey is seeking tangible steps it can take to boost Pak-Afghan economic ties -- such as projects in the border areas, disaster management, health, and Turkish Chamber of Commerce and Industry involvement.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE54915", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/11/2007 6:50", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002113  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  STATE FOR S/CT PHILL, EB/ESC/TFS LLAMBERT AND DNELSON TREASURY FOR PDEGARABEDIAN AND ASHARMA JUSTICE FOR LSAMUEL AND RSTAPLETON  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/08/2017 TAGS: PTER, KTFN, EFIN, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S ACTION ON DISRUPTING EXTERNAL FINANCING TO THE TALIBAN  REF: STATE 54915  Classified By: Charge d'Affairs Peter W. Bodde for Reasons 1.4(b) and ( d)   1. (S) Summary: Post has been actively engaged with the government of Pakistan on combating financing of the Taliban and Al Qaeda.  Members of the Country Team have taken an inter-agency approach to informing and assisting the GOP at all levels on ways to disrupt the Taliban's financial networks.  Intelligence has been shared, advice on legislation given, and high-level visitors encouraged to raise the issue in their meetings.  There have been some notable successes, and Post continues to work to encourage the GOP to do more.  End Summary  PRESSING THE GOP TO DO MORE ---------------------------  2. (S) Post frequently discusses the need for action against Pakistan-based sources of Taliban financing and financial transfer at the highest levels of Pakistan's government, particularly with the President and Prime Minister.  This includes not only utilizing embassy personnel, but also high-level visitors.  MAKING PROGRESS ON THE MONEY LAUNDERING BILL --------------------------------------------  3. (C) Post is seeing movement in the progress of the anti-money laundering bill.  The Standing Committee on Finance and Revenue of the National Assembly has thoroughly reviewed the bill, recommended amendments, and returned it to the Ministry of Finance.  Post will work with Ministry of Finance to ensure the legislation meets international standards, and it should be sent back to the National Assembly for final passage in early June.  (Note: State Bank of Pakistan Head Dr. Shamshad Akhtar stated a similar time frame in discussions with A/S Sullivan at their April 13 meeting in Washington. End Note)  ENCOURAGING INTERNATIONAL BEST PRACTICES ----------------------------------------  4. (SBU) Pakistan has already passed legislation regulating hawalas.  In essence, hawalas no longer exist in Pakistan as they have been forced to register their businesses and are now considered currency exchange centers.  As a result, more money from remittances abroad is flowing through the regulated banking system.  In addition, Post is working with the Ministry of Social Welfare to help craft legislation which would require charities to register under one uniform act (Note: Currently, charities may register under any one of three ordinances, some dating back to the mid-nineteenth century. End Note) Under this proposed legislation, charities would be required to disclose the names of all their principals, in addition to sources of funding and how that funding is being spent.  PROVIDING TRAINING ------------------  5. (SBU) Post's Legal Attache is working with the Ministry of Interior and Federal Investigation Agency on developing investigative training and an intelligence center to focus on counter-terrorism measures that would develop the capacity to identify and disrupt related money-laundering activities. The U.S. Department of Justice will be providing training for public prosecutors in Pakistan on financial crimes, including forfeiture of assets in prosecutions in the special courts. Once a money-laundering bill is passed, U.S. Department of Justice will develop and present money laundering prosecution training.  This month, U.S. Department of Justice is sponsoring the attendance of a Pakistani delegation at a regional terrorism financing conference in Kuala Lumpur.   ISLAMABAD 00002113  002 OF 002   MONITORING AL RASHID TRUST --------------------------  6. (C) On April 18, the GOP raided the offices of Al Akhtar Trust and Al Rashid Trust, seized assets and sealed the offices.  No arrests were made. (Note: The raids were conducted on a Sunday when there was little chance of the offices being occupied. End Note).  Al Rashid Trust has since petitioned the Sindh High Court to overturn the closures. Sindh High Court did grant an interim order allowing Al Rashid Trust to remove perishable items from their warehouses in order to distribute them to the earthquake-affected areas; however, they cannot distribute the goods themselves and must use the Pakistan Earthquake Relief and Reconstruction Agency or another charity.  Al Rashid Trust told the press they were considering opening another charity using a different name in order to avoid problems like this in the future. Post has scheduled meetings to discuss the situation with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Social Welfare, and will be closely following these events.  SHARING INTELLIGENCE --------------------  7. (S/NF) Post, through aggressive sharing of information, has enabled the government of Pakistan to target the Taliban in an organized and effective manner. Since January 2006, Pakistan has arrested over 1400 Afghan nationals connected to the Taliban, including seven on the list President Karzai passed to President Musharraf in February.  Pakistan has repatriated over 750 of them to Afghanistan.  Since mid-2006, over 300 Taliban personnel have been detained in Quetta alone, including senior Taliban leader Mullah Obaidullah, who was captured in February 2007.  Post continues to work with the security services of both Pakistan and Afghanistan to jointly target Taliban on both sides of the border, as well as encouraging increased bilateral information sharing between the two security services.  In addition, Post is working with coalition partners inside Pakistan to maximize their information sharing with the government of Pakistan. These efforts have resulted in substantial progress being made against the Taliban target.  8.  (S/NF) As a way forward, Post is pursuing two separate strategies, one for targeting Taliban located in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan and one for those in the settled areas of the country such as Quetta and Peshawar. Post has developed a three-pronged approach in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas which involves increasing the counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism capabilities of Pakistan's military and paramilitary forces, especially the Frontier Corps, providing development aid to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, and enabling continued and increased security service operations against the Taliban.  9. (S/NF) Post plans to support security and law enforcement services by helping to enhance their counter intelligence capabilities and by providing appropriate development assistance.  As part of both strategies, Post plans to continue its engagement and information sharing with the GOP and coalition partners at all levels in order to ensure sustained and aggressive efforts against the Taliban throughout Pakistan.  COMMENT -------  10. (S) Post works closely with all levels of the GOP in order to disrupt funding and material support to the Taliban. In general, the GOP has been receptive and appreciative of our efforts. Post will continue to engage in the areas of money laundering and the misuse of charities. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE64169", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/11/2007 12:28", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002129  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  IO/RHS DRL/MLGA EUR/PGI  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/11/2017 TAGS: PHUM, PREL, UNHRC, PK SUBJECT: UNHRC VOTE: PAKISTAN INCLINED TO SUPPORT SLOVENIA AND BOSNIA, NEEDS REASSURANCE  REF: A. STATE 64169       B. STATE 63345      C. STATE 58054  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1. (C) PolOff discussed the upcoming UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) election with MFA Director (UN) Haider Shah on May 11 and emphasized demarche points per refs B and C, urging Pakistan to support Slovenia and Bosnia.  Shah reacted positively to Bosnia's official candidacy (ref A), saying Pakistan would be \"predisposed\" to vote for Bosnia, especially as it is a fellow OIC member.  Shah agreed that Belarus did not merit a seat on the UNHRC.  However, Shah expressed concern that Bosnia's official candidacy has come only days before the vote, which might make it difficult to dismantle previously determined voting arrangements.  Shah said he will press this issue with his colleagues in New York and confer with us.  2. (C) Comment: We believe Pakistan is inclined to vote for Bosnia and Slovenia now that there are two official alternatives to Belarus.  But Pakistan remains concerned about upsetting the status quo if the Belarus candidacy was already had support.  Pakistan is usually reluctant to stick its neck out on UN human rights issues.  Over the coming days, we will need to reassure the Pakistanis that the momentum has turned against Belarus and for Bosnia and Slovenia.  End comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE62913", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/11/2007 12:53", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002133  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  IO/UNP - HBETTS EUR/SCE - JBLACK  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, UNSC, PK, YI SUBJECT: PAKISTAN WILL PUSH FOR SUPPORT OF KOSOVO RESOLUTION AT OIC SUMMIT  REF: STATE 62913  1. (SBU) On May 11, PolOff delivered reftel demarche to Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Director General in charge of OIC affairs.  Chaudhry said that he was aware of Albania's efforts to obtain OIC endorsement for UN Special Envoy Ahtisaari's proposal during the upcoming OIC Summit in Islamabad.  Chaudhry said that the issue was tabled at the OIC pre-summit conference in Jeddah last month, but delegates were unable to reach consensus because of reservations by both Indonesia and Qatar.  Chaudhry said that the Government of Pakistan supports Ahtisaari's report and emphasized Pakistan's belief that it is important to support the UN. Because it remains unresolved after the Jeddah pre-summit conference, Kosovo will be on the agenda of the OIC Special Committee tasked to resolve outstanding issues.  Chaudhry promised that Pakistan will work to gain Indonesia's support for Ahtisaari's proposal in the OIC Special Committee.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/14/2007 11:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002157  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: VIOLENCE IN KARACHI:  RUMOR MILL ACTIVE WHILE CITY WAITS  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (U)   The weekend's politically motivated violence in Karachi left over 40 people dead and hundreds wounded.  As of 1400 local May 14, clashes and drive-by shootings claimed two more lives.  Consulate General Karachi reports that the city is tense as it braces for the funerals of the seven persons killed May 13 and the possibility of funeral-related violence.  Most of Karachi's shops are closed and few if any people or vehicles are on the roads.  A public order banning gatherings of more than five persons is in effect.  Press reports indicate that some groups of political activists may be preparing for further confrontations.  The Consulate has granted liberal leave to all local employees, and official Americans are staying indoors.  All TDY travel to Karachi is canceled.  2.  (C)  The three hubs of Karachi's political power -- the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM); the Pakistan People's Party (PPP); and the sizable Pashtun minority, many of whom support the Awami Nationalist Party (ANP) -- all suffered casualties over the weekend.  As in past episodes of inter-party fighting (political violence in Karachi between 1986 and 1996 claimed at least 10,000 lives), the heavily armed MQM appears to have precipitated the violence, with equally well-armed PPP and Pashtun cadres fighting back.  3.  (C)  Because the MQM is a member of President Musharraf's national coalition government, the Pakistani rumor mill and some news outlets are postulating that Musharraf allowed, or even somehow encouraged, the weekend's violence in Karachi. (Note:  We have seen nothing to indicate that this might be true.  Indeed, Musharraf certainly would have anticipated that violence of this magnitude would further weaken his political position.  Musharraf realizes that law and order problems anywhere in Pakistan erode public confidence in his administration. Meanwhile, the Chief Justice's reputation, while not necessarily harmed by the incidents, was not enhanced either.  The events in Karachi eclipsed the Chief Justice's attempt to visit the Sindh High Court and knocked his legal case off the front pages of the newspapers.  End Note.)  4.  (C)  Comment:  The government apparently did not take adequate precautions to prevent its coalition partner from engaging in violent tactics similar to those for which it was known in the 1980's and 1990's but which it had increasingly eschewed, especially since joining the Musharraf government. A confluence of distracting events, including complex preparations for May 12's pro-Musharraf rally in Islamabad, may have contributed to the government's lack of attention. We stress again, though, that we do not see duplicity in the failure. We also doubt there is any one reason the police were unable to control Saturday's and Sunday's violence. With political groups so heavily armed, any police force would have found the situation more than challenging. Similarly, if press reports are true that a few mid-ranking police officials disarmed their street constables Saturday morning, it may have been out of fear that some police might join the fighting or exacerbate the violence by firing into crowds.  Whatever the case, the deaths of several police officials each day indicate that some police were attempting to impose security despite their limited training and relative lack of fire power compared to the MQM fighters.  As Saturday proved, few matters facing Pakistan are as important as law enforcement training and equipping -- the reason we continue to support such programs (especially riot control training, a new focus of our mission), and the reason we believe our law enforcement training programs are supremely important.  5.   (C)  Comment continued:  If history repeats itself, this  ISLAMABAD 00002157  002 OF 002   acute period of violence will play itself out within a day or two.  The larger task facing the federal, provincial, and city governments will be preventing a deterioration into cycles of political violence like those that plagued Karachi during the 1980s and 1990s.  End Comment.  6.  (C)  Consulate Karachi also reports:  -- The closure of Karachi port is costing Pakistan as much as USD 11 million per hour, the value of goods normally processed in that time.  Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan understands the port will reopen on May 15, meaning the closure should not unduly effect goods bound for U.S. forces in Afghanistan.  --  PPP contacts tell the Consulate that ISI officials called them Friday evening to recommend they stay indoors on Saturday.  ANP contacts report they received no similar phone calls.  --  The situation is such that tabulating actual death tolls is difficult.  --  (Note:  In past episodes of violence, only the Pakistan Army was able to bring the MQM under control. The Pakistan military deployed on Sunday, though Consulate Karachi reports soldiers are not highly visible as of 1400 Monday.  End Note.) BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2157", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/15/2007 11:22", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002175  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MAY 15 KARACHI UPDATE  REF: ISLAMABAD 2157  Classified By: Charge Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) According to Consulate Karachi, as of 1500 Tuesday, April 15 (three days after the outbreak of violence), most Karachi businesses are operating normally and the city, while somber, is returning to normal. Public transportation is operating. The airport and all usual transport routes in Karachi are secure and open. The Karachi port is open and U.S. cargo was despatched to Afghanistan at 0600 local.  2. (C) Sporadic violence continues. According to Consulate Karachi, eight people died and seven were wounded overnight. Rangers and unspecified gangs clashed in the Liyari neighborhood; one minor was killed in the crossfire. According to the press, the Sindh government is considering imposing curfews in selected neighborhoods.  3.  (C)  We are unaware of any Karachi-related protests around the country.  Embassy contacts report that MQM Members of the National Assembly worry that Pashtun elements may attempt to exact revenge on them. The MQM members are taking unusual steps to protect their personal security, according to our contacts.  Contacts add that, when the MQM National Assembly members attempted to shake hands with members from other parties on May 14 (a cultural requirement in Pakistan), the non-MQM members refused to shake hands.  4. (U) Newspapers report that the unrest has cost the Pakistani economy 12 billion rupees (USD 200 million).  5. (C)  We have requested a meeting with MQM leader Dr. Farooq Saatar to discuss the weekend's events.     BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/16/2007 11:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002193  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: ALL QUIET IN KARACHI; NO ONE YET HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR VIOLENCE  REF: ISLAMABAD 2175 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) According to Consulate Karachi, Karachi is back to normal as of 1400 May 16. The ports are open and pedestrian and vehicular traffic are back to typical levels.  2. (C) Media contacts report that rumors that the Sindh and Karachi governments sanctioned the weekend's violence are spreading.  According to the contacts, the government's failure to arrest anyone involved in the violence or to investigate police officers accused of impropriety or dereliction of duty is fueling the speculation.  (Note:  Such rumors will likely further damage President Musharraf's public image, as his ruling PML-Q party and the MQM party are coalition partners at the provincial and national levels. End Note.)  3. (C-NF) The British High Commission has informed us that, on May 9, British diplomats attempted to convince MQM parliamentary leader Farooq Sattar to postpone the MQM's May 12 pro-Musharraf demonstration so that it would not compete with the Chief Justice's rally in Karachi.  Sattar refused, but assured the diplomats that the MQM demonstrations would not be violent.  Sattar stressed at the time that violence was not in the party's interest. An Embassy contact reported on May 15 that Sattar had had no foreknowledge of plans for violence.  Sattar reportedly told government officials that the decision to go ahead with the demonstration was \"not his recommendation.\" He hinted that he was overruled by MQM's leader-in-exile, Altaf Hussain.  (Note:  On May 14 and 15, Sattar apologized to journalists for armed attacks on Aaj television's Karachi office on May 12.  Sattar has not acknowledged any responsibility for the broader breakdown in law and order.  End Note.)  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/17/2007 10:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002207  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, ASEC, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT, CHIEF JUSTICE'S ATTORNEY REFUSE TO COMPROMISE, CASE CONTINUES IN SUPREME COURT  REF: ISLAMABAD 2033 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Since May 14, Pakistan's Supreme Court has held daily hearings to consider 23 petitions objecting to the filing of a reference against Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry.  The Court has issued no opinions since the opening of arguments.  Supreme Judicial Council proceedings against the Chief Justice remain in suspense while the Supreme Court hears arguments about the constitutionality of convening the Supreme Judicial Council.  2. (C) On May 11, Former Pakistan People's Party Senator Abdullah Riar hosted a quiet meeting at his residence between National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz and Chief Justice Chaudhry's lead counsel, Aitzaz Ahsan, to encourage outside-the-courtroom dialogue between the two sides. According to Riar, the meeting did not go well. Both sides stuck to their formal talking points, and Aziz reportedly remarked that it would be better for Musharraf to accept the court's judgement than to withdraw the reference.  The tense meeting ended with both sides saying, \"We will see you in court.\"  3. (C) On May 15, Acting Chief Justice Rana Bhagwandas appointed two Supreme Court justices to supervise the investigation into the murder of Supreme Court Additional Registrar Hammad Raza.  Four unidentified men entered Raza's home in the early morning hours of May 14 and shot him to death.  Police initially characterized the incident as a robbery, but Raza's wife (also a British citizen) and others have claimed that it was a targeted killing.  Munir Malik, one of Chief Justice Chaudhry's defense attorneys, told us that Raza and the Chief Justice were close associates.  Chief Justice Chaudhry brought Raza with him from Balochistan when he came to Islamabad to take the position of Chief Justice. After President Musharraf filed the reference against Chaudhry, Pakistan's intelligence and security agencies reportedly questioned Raza several times, according to Malik.  The court has directed police to submit daily status reports on the investigation to the supervising Supreme Court judges. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/17/2007 12:27", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002218  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/17/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MQM HOLDING EMERGENCY MEETING IN LONDON   Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  A/DCM spoke by phone with MQM Party in-country chief Dr. Farooq Sattar on May 17.  Sattar reported he and other MQM leaders were departing that evening for an emergency meeting in London, where MQM head Altaf Hussain lives in exile.  Sattar said that many in the MQM's leadership realized the weekend's violence, widely blamed on the MQM, damaged the party's reputation and political position.  2.  (C)  A/DCM responded that it was important that the MQM work to repair the damage to its reputation and to lessen tensions in Karachi.  She noted that credible criminal investigations into the violence and into whether the police behaved appropriately on May 11-13 could help to restore the public's confidence in the MQM.  (Note:  The MQM holds important leadership positions in the Karachi and Sindh governments and is a partner in Musharraf's ruling coalition End Note.)  3.  (C)  Sattar claimed only a small number of MQM supporters were involved in May 12's violence.  A/DCM noted that it was troubling that the MQM cells had seemed so well armed. Sattar agreed that the party should consider disarming, but then launched into a 40 minute monologue blaming May 12's violence on everyone from President Musharraf to feudal landholders to the ISI to other political parties.  4.  (C)  Sattar claimed that he had attempted to call Awami National Party leader Asfandyar Wali Khan.  (Note:  The Pashtun nationalist party reportedly lost at least 13 members on May 12. On May 16, Asfandyar told us he was eager to speak to Sattar, but that Sattar had not phoned him.  Asfandyar believed the onus was on Sattar to initiate the call.  End Note.)  Sattar stated that Asfandyar had publicly demanded that the MQM apologize for the violence; the MQM was unwilling to do so.  A/DCM encouraged Sattar to find a way to acknowledge Pashtun honor and to lower what the press was describing as a high level of tension between the MQM and Karachi's Pashtun community.  Sattar agreed with this imperative.  5.  (C)  Comment:  The press and some of our contacts are reporting that Sattar, whom we have generally found to be a reasonable if voluble man, is deeply frustrated with decisions emanating from the party's London headquarters. We have heard from various contacts that Sattar opposed going ahead with May 12's rally, but that Hussain overruled him. The outcome of this weekend's leadership meeting could be a sign of the future direction of the MQM.  End Comment.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2197", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/18/2007 2:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002220  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/17/2017 TAGS: PREF, PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK, AF SUBJECT: PROTESTS AND CLASHES OVER BEGINNING OF CAMP DEMOLITIONS  REF: ISLAMABAD 02197  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY:  On May 16, the Government of Pakistan began the process of physically closing two Afghan refugee camps by bulldozing several buildings.  At Jungle Pir Alizai camp in Balochistan, the action sparked protests and gunfire between the Frontier Corps and locals, resulting in a number of injuries and the death of at least one Afghan refugee.  Both Pir Alizai and Kachi Garhi, in North West Frontier Province, are scheduled for closure between April 16 and June 15.  End Summary.  Jungle Pir Alizai -----------------  2. (SBU) On May 16, at the request of Balochistan's Home Secretary Tariq Ayub, law enforcement agencies bulldozed  SIPDIS several abandoned houses at Jungle Pir Alizai camp in Balochistan.  According to Azhar Rasheed, Assistant Police Inspector General, the action was intended to send a signal to undocumented Afghans to return to Afghanistan and to encourage legitimate refugees to either repatriate or relocate to an approved camp.  A crowd gathered in protest and threw stones, injuring a number of policemen.  Gunfire ensued; Rasheed said no one knows who fired the first shot. Media reports indicate the firing lasted several hours, as armed refugees established positions on surrounding hillsides and shot at authorities.  At least one Afghan refugee died, and a number of refugees and Pakistani locals were injured in the violence.  (Note:  At this time, reports of the number of injured range from six to twelve.  End Note.)  A crowd of protesters blocked the main road between the provincial capital of Quetta and the Chaman border crossing.  UNHCR Assistant Representative Killian Kleinschmidt told RefCoord that four camp leaders were arrested and released several hours later, after the road was re-opened.  3.  (C) (Note:  The process of closing Jungle Pir Alizai camp was scheduled to begin a month ago, but Inspector General of Police Tariq Khosa reportedly asked the federal government for time to establish rule of law in the camp before beginning the closure process.  It is unclear why Khosa or other leaders involved chose this time to begin demolition. End Note.)  Kachi Garhi -----------  4. (SBU) On May 15, the Peshawar Development Authority began bulldozing shops on the roadside perimeter of Kachi Garhi camp, a few kilometers from the center of Peshawar in North West Frontier Province.  According to Shahab Saqib, a senior officer with the Province's Commissionerate for Afghan Refugees, some shops lost goods during the demolition.  Saqib claimed no houses were destroyed.  UNHCR's Concerns ----------------  5.  (C) UNHCR tells us that, while they do not necessarily oppose demolitions, they are very concerned by the lack of consultations and transparency regarding the May 16 actions. UNHCR is a member of the general coordination task force charged with overseeing camp demolitions, but UNHCR was not informed of the actions and found out only when officers witnessed the Kachi Garhi demolition taking place.  6. (C) Comment:  Closing refugee camps will continue to be a difficult and sensitive undertaking for the Government of Pakistan.  Government authorities have for the moment stopped the demolition at Pir Alizai and are working with camp elders to develop an effective and peaceful camp closure strategy. End Comment.  ISLAMABAD 00002220  002 OF 002   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/18/2007 13:08", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 002252  SIPDIS  STATE FOR ISN/CPI  - JCHALMERS, AND NEA/IR - SMISKO TREASURY FOR TFFC - RLOEFFLER  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/18/2017 TAGS: EFIN, KNNP, PARM, IR, DA, SW, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S IMPLEMENTATION OF UNSCR 1747 ASSET FREEZE AGAINST SEPAH BANK AND OTHER LISTED ENTITIES  Classified by Economic Counselor Mary Townswick for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  Ref: State 60238  1.  (S) The External Finance Division of Pakistan's Finance Ministry detailed to Econ the country's procedures for implementing the asset freeze provisions of UNSCR 1747.  The MFA is the entity that receives updates from the UN on additions to the 1747 designee list and then has this information published in Pakistan's official Gazette.  At the same time, the MFA sends the information to the Finance Ministry, which in turn sends the information to the State Bank of Pakistan. The State Bank instructs all banks operating in the country to freeze any accounts of 1747 designees.  2.  (S) The State Bank normally sends information on new 1747 designees, along with instructions to banks to freeze these accounts, the same day it receives the updated notifications.  However, in the case of banks that are less technologically sophisticated, dissemination of such instructions can take up to two days.  The banks are required to immediately instruct all of their branches to enforce the freeze.  The State bank works with individual banks' compliance officers to confirm that the freeze orders are being enforced.  Finally, the State Bank reports back to the Finance Ministry on any accounts that are frozen as a result of banks' 1747 enforcement actions.  3.  (S) Per reftel request, Econ has also been seeking information from the Finance Ministry as to what actions have been taken specifically with respect to freezing assets of Bank Sepah and Bank Sepah International.  While we have been assured by Finance officials that they are working to obtain the information we requested, Econ is still awaiting the promised response.  Post will continue to press for information as to what action the GOP has taken against Sepah.  Bodde " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1846", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/21/2007 12:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002270  SIPDIS  ///COLLECTIVE ADDED///////////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/21/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE ISSUE FLARES UP AGAIN  REF: ISLAMABAD 1846  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4  (b) and (d)  1. (C) In what has become a recurring spectacle in Islamabad, mosque supporters and seminary students-- better known as the Red Mosque brigade-- have again \"kidnapped\" police to draw attention to their demands. On May 18, the Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) \"brigade\" captured four plain-clothes police officers outside the mosque and held them as ransom for the release of eleven religious students associated with the Red Mosque. (Note. The eleven students had been arrested earlier on various charges, including raiding video shops. End Note.) Mosque leader Maulana Abdul Rashid Ghazi accused the police of spying on the mosque and threatened violence in response. (Note. Press contacts who meet regularly with Maulana Ghazi have reported that he is likely bluffing on the threat of violence and wants to pursue negotiations. End Note.)  2. (C) On May 19, according to police contacts two of the policemen were released and the remaining two were still in custody but unharmed. Four of the original eleven students held by police were granted bail on May 19 and are in the process of being released.  3. (C) On May 20, heavy contingents of police surrounded the mosque as high-level negotiations for the release of the policemen continued. The police also arrested 37 religious students who were wielding sticks and blocking traffic as a \"preventive measure\". By Sunday evening the situation had de-escalated as police ranks moved away from the Red Mosque, surrounding roads were reopened, and nearby markets opened for business.  4. (C) As of 1700 on May 21, the Red Mosque brigade continues to hold two police officers and demand the release of the remaining seven students that are in police custody. Maulana Ghazi claims 2000 male students are surrounding the mosque, however, journalists estimate the number as far fewer. Most banners have been removed from the mosque and there are far fewer visible supporters than in recent days. The students continue to carry bamboo poles and some inside have AK-47s, according to press and police contacts. The number of police and rangers in Islamabad has been increased by as many as 10,000 on reserve. Police contacts report that their strategy remains a measured and deliberate one; the police are willing to wait out the mosque supporters. Concern about the women and children inside the mosque remains a key factor and the police will not take any rash actions. The Interior Ministry continues to engage the leadership of the Red Mosque and Maulana Ghazi has told the press that the mosque leadership is still open to negotiations. Post continues to monitor the Red Mosque situation very closely and will report septel on the political implications of this latest stand-off.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/22/2007 14:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002292  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/22/2017 TAGS: PK, AF, PREL SUBJECT: TRUCKS DESTROYED IN ROCKET ATTACK AT TORKHAM BORDER   Classified By: A/DCM Cecile Shea, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) According to Mission contacts, at approximately 0400 local time Monday, May 21, unknown persons fired two Russian-made MRB-12 rockets at a group of fuel trucks bound for Coalition forces in Afghanistan.  The trucks were parked in a lot near the Torkham border crossing, about 35 miles west of Peshawar.  At least four of the trucks were destroyed, and the media reported another six trucks severely damaged.  Local Frontier Corps soldiers confiscated three additional rockets of the same type from a nearby hilltop and detained eight Afghan refugees for questioning.  (Note:  At this time, authorities cannot verify that the eight detained refugees were associated with the rocket attack.  End Note.)  2.  (C) Oil tanker drivers tell us they often must spend days and even weeks parked on the Pakistan side of Torkham crossing while they wait for Afghan officials to process their customs and other documents.  They report that the delays are a security issue, as multiple fuel trucks parked near each other provide targets of opportunity for miscreants and others.  Several dozen truckers protested processing delays May 22, blocking the road leading to the border crossing for 30 minutes.  3.  (C) The attack followed a May 7 fuel truck bombing in which nine trucks were destroyed in the Landikohtal area, about 6 miles from Torkham.  Media reported the May 21 incident was part of a growing trend of attacks against fuel tankers traveling through the Northwest Frontier Province. Local contacts claimed that some of these recent attacks, however, were staged.  According to these contacts and to press reports, some truckers have siphoned the fuel from their trucks and then set the vehicles on fire to cover up the theft; contacts report some truckers have also simply destroyed the trucks (without first siphoning fuel) and sought insurance money from their trucking companies.  The involvement of rockets in Monday's attack, however, leads observers and the press to believe the event was not staged.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/23/2007 11:44", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 002316  SIPDIS  //////CORRECTED COPY - CLASSIFIED BY LINE ADDED//////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/22/2017 TAGS: PREL, PK, AF, IN SUBJECT: SCENESETTER: CHAIRMAN JCS GENERAL PACE MEETING WITH PAKISTAN JCS GENERAL EHSAN UL HAQ  ISLAMABAD 00002316  001.2 OF 004   Classified by Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C//NF) Embassy Islamabad welcomes your meeting with Chief of Joint Staff General Ehsan Ul Haq of the Pakistan Army.  Your meeting comes at an important time in U.S.-Pakistan relations:  Politicians, opinion makers, and the press are paying close attention to what Pakistanis view as unfair public criticism of their policies and efforts on the War on Terror.  The mid-March suspension of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry from the Pakistan Supreme Court has challenged President Musharraf's political party, and an April 30 meeting in Ankara between Musharraf and Afghan President Hamid Karzai, although it enhanced ties between the two countries' governments, failed to resolve essential disagreements between the leaders.  On May 12, violent clashes between political parties in Karachi left over 40 people dead and hundreds wounded.  2. (C//NF) The current government in Islamabad is facing challenges, but these challenges are neither new to Pakistan's leadership nor insurmountable.  Your meeting with General Ul Haq is an opportunity to reassure a key ally that the U.S. remains committed to our alliance.  While General Ul Haq is expecting a frank exchange with you in private about the War on Terror, the FATA, the Taliban, and al-Qa'ida, the Government of Pakistan even more than usual needs the meeting to highlight a public posture that encourages Pakistani honor and pride. Public statements that emphasize our appreciation for Pakistan's significant assistance and sacrifices to the war on terror - and our interest in sustaining a broad-based strategic partnership with Pakistan will help assuage the fears of Pakistanis who are increasingly worried that we intend to down-shift our relationship with Pakistan.  U.S./Pak Relations ------------------  3. (C//NF) The U.S. has developed a close partnership with the Government of Pakistan (GOP) since 9/11.  We provide financial and technical support on many fronts: counterterrorism; military assistance and training; earthquake relief and reconstruction; economic development; social and educational capacity building; the largest Fulbright senior scholar exchange program in the world; law enforcement training; judicial reform; counter-narcotics assistance; intelligence sharing; and support to strengthen electoral institutions and political party workers in preparation for upcoming Parliamentary elections.  4. (C//NF) President Musharraf and the Government of Pakistan have shown considerable courage in aligning their country with the U.S. and in advancing a platform of enlightened moderation.  Musharraf often is cast as a puppet of the West when he attempts to crack down on militants or introduce progressive legislation, such as the Women's Protection Bill.  In our public diplomacy efforts, we are careful to thank Musharraf for his leadership and the people of Pakistan for their friendship while not encouraging the perception that the President is pursuing his agenda only to keep the West happy.  5. (C//NF) Pakistani politicians and the press continue to express concern that House Resolution 1 (which aims to implement 9/11 Commission recommendations) will negatively impact the U.S.-Pakistan relationship.  Pakistanis view proposed certification requirements on Pakistan's commitment to the War on Terror and democracy as successors to the Pressler Amendment and herald the proposed legislation as proof that the U.S. has near-term plans to end its financial and technical support to Pakistan.  Domestic Issues ---------------   ISLAMABAD 00002316  002.2 OF 004   Classified by Chrage d'Affaires Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  6. (C) Democracy:  President Musharraf has committed publicly and privately to moving Pakistan toward a civilian-led government.  He has also committed to holding general elections on time, which, according to Pakistan's Constitution, must be before January 15, 2008.  Musharraf seems to understand the imperative of holding credible elections.  The U.S. Embassy has set an ambitious agenda of working with the Government to organize a credible and transparent election.  We are assisting the Election Commission of Pakistan to ensure that all Pakistani citizens who are eligible to vote are included on the country's new computerized voter rolls.  The U.S. is also strengthening parties across Pakistan's political spectrum by offering technical assistance focused on organizing issue-based campaigns, increasing party membership, and engaging the Election Commission of Pakistan on rules and laws that affect elections.  7. (S//NF) Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA): Over the past year, Pakistan has been implementing a new, multi-faceted strategy in the tribal areas, focused on strengthening the government's writ; tamping down on the spread of talibanization; increasing development assistance; and engaging in military strikes on militant compounds based on intelligence provided by the U.S. and Coalition forces. Effective development and enhanced security in FATA are essential to rendering the area inhospitable to terrorism and extremism, and the U.S. has an important role to play on both fronts.  To support the GOP's comprehensive approach to the FATA, the State Department has asked Congress for $750 million over five years to support development activities in FATA, and $72 million in FY07 to enhance the capacity of Pakistan's Frontier Corps.  8.  (S//NF) FATA continued:  As part of its overall strategy, the GOP entered into an agreement with tribal elders in North Waziristan in September 2006.  The Government believes that the agreement will halt the talibanization of the area and decrease attacks originating from Pakistan against Coalition forces in Afghanistan.  Musharraf recognizes that the agreement has not met all of its goals.  His government is pushing local tribes to \"keep up their side of the bargain,\" but he reserves the right to take military action if necessary.  9. (C//NF) FATA continued:  Pakistan's January 16 strike on a militant training base in Zamzola, South Waziristan, precipitated an ongoing series of deadly retaliatory attacks - over 20 to date - throughout the country.  They have resulted in the death of several high-ranking police officers, as well as scores of civilians and military personnel.  On April 28, a suicide bomber attempted to assassinate Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao near Peshawar; 28 people died and 40 were wounded.  The GOP's resolve to fight the militants in this region has not abated, but the casualties from these attacks, along with the approximately 800 War on Terror-related deaths of Pakistani military and paramilitary personnel, fuels public questioning of Pakistan's GWOT participation.  10. (C) Domestic Politics: President Musharraf uses the term \"enlightened moderation\" to describe his policies that discourage the radicalization of Islam and promote the empowerment of women. Musharraf is the first leader of Pakistan since the 1950s to say \"no\" to Pakistan's radical Islamists. The Women's Protection Bill, signed in December 2006, was the first-ever rollback of Zia-ul Haq's Islamization measures of the 1970's.  Musharraf has also re-energized the Council of Islamic Ideology, a nationally respected and forward-looking body of Islamic scholars.  The Neighborhood  ISLAMABAD 00002316  003.2 OF 004   Classified by Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  11. (S) Afghanistan:  The relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan continues to suffer from mutual suspicion and recrimination, with Afghanistan concerned about cross-border infiltration and Pakistan worried by the prospect of India using its diplomatic assets in Afghanistan to foment instability in Balochistan.  Both capitals engage in bouts of unhelpful public rhetoric, each blaming the other for the presence of militants in the border region, and for not doing enough to prosecute the battle against their common enemies.  12. (C//NF) Afghanistan (cont): Since Presidents Musharraf and Karzai met over dinner with President Bush in September 2006, relations between the two countries have remained chilly.  A late April 2007 meeting between Musharraf, Karzai, and Turkish President Sezer in Ankara failed to resolve essential disagreements between the two leaders.  Tensions between the two Presidents are sometimes mirrored by troops on the border, as can be seen by recent firing incidents. Meanwhile, in an attempt to encourage some of Pakistan's 2.6 million remaining Afghan refugees to return home, Pakistan has announced its intention to close four refugee camps in 2007.  Refugees who do not repatriate will be resettled in other camps in Pakistan.  13. (S//NF) India:  Relations between India and Pakistan have rarely been better, but problems remain.  In February 2004, President Musharraf and then-Indian-Prime Minister Vajpayee started the \"Composite Dialogue\" peace process, which has significantly reduced tensions between the two countries. The fourth round of the Composite Dialogue began in March 2007 with talks on core disputes as well as cooperation in trade, agriculture, education, and other areas.  The dialogue has produced Confidence-Building Measures, such as a Nuclear Risk Reduction Treaty, bus-lines across the Line of Control between Pakistani and Indian Kashmir, and people-to-people cultural exchanges.  Although the core Kashmir, Siachen, and Sir Creek disputes remain unresolved, senior officials from the countries meet and speak with one another on these and other important strategic matters regularly.  Pakistan has appreciated President Bush's even-handed statements about the need for good relations between India and Pakistan and for a peaceful resolution of the dispute on terms acceptable to Pakistan, India, and the people of Kashmir.  14. (C) The Middle East: In January, President Musharraf renewed his two-year old effort to be a leader of the moderate Muslim world with trips to nine Islamic capitals in four weeks. Musharraf is pushing the leaders of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, the United Arab Emirates, Malaysia, Indonesia, Iran, and Turkey to unite around a \"new forceful initiative\" to work on issues of concern, including Israel/Palestine, Iraq, and Lebanon.  15. (C)  Iran:  Pakistan has a long and complicated relationship with its neighbor Iran.  Government of Pakistan officials often allude to Pakistan's vulnerability to Iranian troublemaking, citing the influence of Tehran on Pakistan's sizable Shi'a community, approximately 20 percent of the population. Privately, Prime Minister Aziz and Foreign Minister Kasuri recognize that Iran's nuclear program has the potential to destabilize the region, including Pakistan. Both have urged their Iranian counterparts to take the EU-3 and U.S. proposals seriously and begin negotiations forthwith. Publicly, the Government of Pakistan has called for all parties to abide by their international obligations and to pursue a negotiated resolution. On February 5, President Musharraf met with Iranian President Ahmedinejad in Tehran. They discussed security in the Gulf and Afghanistan as well as implementation of a multi-billion dollar gas pipeline that would transit Iran, Pakistan, and India.  Musharraf used his  ISLAMABAD 00002316  004.2 OF 004   Classified by Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, reason 1.4 (b), (d)  trip to Iran to deliver tough points on Iran's unhelpful interference in the internal affairs of Lebanon, Iraq, and Afghanistan and the need to tamp down Sunni-Shi'a tensions.  16.(C)  China:  Chinese interaction with Pakistan generally sticks to the bottom line of business, eschewing discussion of democracy, human rights, or Islamic extremism.  China is well regarded by the Pakistan public for its high-profile investments in Pakistan's infrastructure (the Karakoram Highway and the development of port facilities in Gwadar and energy resources in Balochistan,), and for its economic prowess.  Chinese military sales - unencumbered by the Congressional notifications and rigorous releasability reviews that characterize U.S. defense sales - are often sweetened by attractive financing arrangements.  Even so, Pakistani military officials candidly admit that they get what they pay for with Chinese arms and equipment and that they prefer to buy American.  The first Pak-China joint military exercise in Pakistan - \"Friendship 2006\" - occurred in early December 2006, shortly after the successful state visit of Chinese President Hu to Pakistan.    BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/23/2007 13:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002317  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/22/2017 TAGS: PK, AF, PREL SUBJECT: TRUCKS DESTROYED IN ROCKET ATTACK AT TORKHAM BORDER (CORRECTED CLASSIFICATION)  Classified By: A/DCM Cecile Shea, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C//REL TO ISAF, NATO) According to Mission contacts, at approximately 0400 local time Monday, May 21, unknown persons fired two Russian-made MRB-12 rockets at a group of fuel trucks bound for Coalition forces in Afghanistan.  The trucks were parked in a lot near the Torkham border crossing, about 35 miles west of Peshawar.  At least four of the trucks were destroyed, and the media reported another six trucks severely damaged.  Local Frontier Corps soldiers confiscated three additional rockets of the same type from a nearby hilltop and detained eight Afghan refugees for questioning.  (Note:  At this time, authorities cannot verify that the eight detained refugees were associated with the rocket attack.  End Note.)  2.  (C//REL TO ISAF, NATO) Oil tanker drivers tell us they often must spend days and even weeks parked on the Pakistan side of Torkham crossing while they wait for Afghan officials to process their customs and other documents.  They report that the delays are a security issue, as multiple fuel trucks parked near each other provide targets of opportunity for miscreants and others.  Several dozen truckers protested processing delays May 22, blocking the road leading to the border crossing for 30 minutes.  3.  (C//REL TO ISAF, NATO) The attack followed a May 7 fuel truck bombing in which nine trucks were destroyed in the Landikohtal area, about 6 miles from Torkham.  Media reported the May 21 incident was part of a growing trend of attacks against fuel tankers traveling through the Northwest Frontier Province.  Local contacts claimed that some of these recent attacks, however, were staged.  According to these contacts and to press reports, some truckers have siphoned the fuel from their trucks and then set the vehicles on fire to cover up the theft; contacts report some truckers have also simply destroyed the trucks (without first siphoning fuel) and sought insurance money from their trucking companies.  The involvement of rockets in Monday's attack, however, leads observers and the press to believe the event was not staged.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2270", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/25/2007 9:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002334  SIPDIS  ////////COLLECTIVE ADDED/////////  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, ASEC, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE RELEASES POLICE OFFICERS  REF: ISLAMABAD 2270  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b),(d)  1. (C) On May 24, the Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) brigade released the last two police officers kidnapped on May 18. The other two officers had been released on May 19. (Note. The Red Mosque \"brigade\" is a group of supporters and madrassa students who are often seen outside the mosque wielding large bamboo poles. End note.) According to press reports and embassy contacts, back-channel negotiations between the Islamabad administration and the mosque leaders resulted in the officers' release. Interior Ministry spokesman Brigadier Javel Iqbal Cheema told the press that the two men were released unconditionally and no/no reciprocal promises were made to the Red Mosque clerics. Islamabad Chief Commissioner Khalid Pervez told PolOff that by arresting upwards of 40 madrassa students authorities applied substantial pressure on the mosque, which ultimately led to the peaceful release of the police officers.  2. (C) The streets surrounding the mosque are open and quiet, as they have been since May 20 (reftel). Embassy employees confirm that no police officers or any madrassa students are standing outside the Red Mosque. The only massing of police forces in the area was observed on May 20, almost a week ago. Islamabad Inspector General of Police has assured PolOff that the force outside the mosque on May 20 was a show of strength and that the police were cognizant of the sensitivity of the situation. No police raid or operation took place and the police withdrew after a few hours, once it became clear the two police officers inside the mosque would eventually be released.  3. (C) Journalists who regularly meet with the Red Mosque clerics emphasized to us that the mosque leadership is interested in pursuing negotiations. Our contacts tell us that, occasional inflammatory rhetoric aside, they do not anticipate violence emanating from the mosque as long as the police continue showing restraint. (Note. The Red Mosque issue, though followed colorfully and breathlessly by the press, has been of relatively minor concern amongst Pakistani politicians and the public. Most see the recurring antics of the Red Mosque as a distraction from larger political issues facing the country. End Note.)    BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2193", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2007 7:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002344  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES WORRIED ABOUT MQM VIOLENCE  REF: ISLAMABAD 2193  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Embassy contacts from opposition political parties are mourning their losses in the May 11-14 violence in Karachi. They tell us they are both angry at the lack of effective police response and fearful that the MQM political party may be returning to its previous violent tactics.  The MQM, on the other hand, reportedly is engaged in high level discussions on ways to repair the damage to its reputation (reftel).  2. (C) On May 16, Awami National Party Leader Asfandyar Ali Khan had tears in his eyes as he described to us the events of May 12.  (Note: According to press reports, the ANP lost more supporters on May 12 than any other party. End Note.) Asfandyar said he felt somewhat responsible for the deaths of 13 of his party members, as he had approved the ANP's participation in the pro-Chief Justice rally that day.  He stressed his instructions to his members had been to remain completely non-violent, and that he was convinced his followers had followed those instructions, at least until MQM supporters began firing at them.  Asfandyar reportedly is engaging in negotiations with senior MQM leaders in hopes of soliciting an apology from the MQM.  Asfandyar fears that, if none is forthcoming, the Pashtun honor code might motivate some ANP followers to seek revenge.  3. (U) Pakistan People's Party Chairman Benazir Bhutto has publicly condemned the government for the violence, which she says claimed 14 People's Party workers. (The MQM is a partner in the national and Sindh coalition governments.)  Bhutto has called for the Supreme Court to take suo motto notice of the violence and to prosecute those responsible for it.  4. (C) Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) Information Secretary Ahsan Iqbal has told us he blames the MQM for the  SIPDIS killing of PML-N Joint Secretary (Sindh) Asghar Ali Shah on May 11. (Note: Media reports indicate that unidentified gunmen shot and killed Shah and a security guard and injured two others as they were erecting a welcome banner for the Chief Justice in anticipation of his arrival in Karachi. End Note.)  Iqbal is not confident that those resorting to violence will be brought to account.  He worries the MQM is returning to ruling Karachi through intimidation.  Iqbal reports that, after the killings of opposition party workers, MQM party members visited the homes of the deceased and warned their families not to file reports with the police or to reveal the deceased's party affiliations.  5. (C) Comment: Senior MQM officials in Pakistan (MQM leader Altaf Hussain lives in exile in London) have worked hard in recent years to convince the public that the MQM is a reformed, peaceful, middle class party. The events of May 11-14 greatly damaged the MQM's reputation, and repairing it will be difficult.  The MQM's senior most leader in Pakistan recently informed us that MQM's hopes of doing well in Punjab and the Northwest Frontier Province in the next election are dead.  The party's new goal is merely not to lose ground in Sindh.  6. (C) Comment, cont'd: Some members of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League also recognize the potential damage to President Musharraf's political position because of the purported actions of one of his coalition partners. A number of PML-Q members are advising the President to try to repair the damage by convening a neutral commission to investigate  ISLAMABAD 00002344  002 OF 002   allegations of government negligence.  Meanwhile, our PPP contacts tell us that, while they are angry and saddened over May 12, the highest levels of the party are still open to negotiating with President Musharraf on possible future cooperation between the two parties.  End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/26/2007 8:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 002348  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/24/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: ISLAMABAD HOSTS ORGANIZATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE MINISTERIAL  ISLAMABAD 00002348  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (U) On 15-17 May, the 34th Islamic Conference of Ministers convened in Islamabad.  Ministers discussed the need for stability in Iraq and Somalia; assistance for Sudan and Afghanistan; concern over Iran; and independence for Kosovo. Other highlights were a brainstorming session on the causes of and potential remedies for \"Islamophobia\" and several discussions on how to increase the organization's capacity for promoting science, education, and health throughout the world. President Musharraf proposed a Muslim peacekeeping force for Iraq, but the Iraqi Foreign Minister rejected the proposal.  End Summary.  ------------------------------------ Pakistan Hosts Successful Conference ------------------------------------  2. (U) On 15-17 May, Islamabad hosted the 34th annual session of the Islamic Conference of Ministers.  The agenda for the conference was wide-ranging: eighty-two agenda items covered political affairs; Muslim communities and minorities; legal issues; economics; science and technology; and cultural and social topics.  Using his position as host of the conference, President Musharraf emphasized the need to address internal religious upheavals and socio-economic disparities in the Muslim world. He also stressed the need to resolve the Israel-Palestine dispute, Iraq, Afghanistan, Lebanon and Kashmir.  Musharraf told the Conference that the OIC should revamp itself to prevent the \"downward slide\" of the Islamic world, since disparities with the Western world were increasing, not decreasing.  3.  (C) Musharraf used his opening speech to propose that Muslim countries establish a peacekeeping force that could deploy to Iraq to replace the current U.S.-led coalition. Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari later told reporters that the idea had been raised (and rejected) before and that his government wanted Iraqi troops to stabilize the situation, not foreign peacekeepers.  Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs OIC Director Aizaz Chaudhry later told PolOff that the media had blown Zebari's rejection out of proportion. Musharraf was merely calling for Muslim nations to be ready if asked to fill in. Musharraf understood that a peacekeeping force would only deploy if Iraq requested one.  4. (U) The Draft Final Communique and the Islamabad Declaration can be found at Pakistan's Foreign Ministry Website: www.mofa.gov.pk/Pages/ICFM Link.htm.  --------------------------------------- Iraq: OIC To Set Up Coordination Office ---------------------------------------  5. (U) The Conference strongly condemned terrorist acts in Iraq and stressed the importance of international support for security and stability there. The Conference emphasized the need to form a Contact Group in Iraq and is planning to open an OIC Coordination Office in Baghdad.  ---------------------------- Somalia and Sudan Assistance  ISLAMABAD 00002348  002.2 OF 003   ----------------------------  6. (U) The Conference called on member states to contribute to the National Reconciliation Congress scheduled for mid-June 2007 in Somalia. The Conference also decided to establish an OIC Liaison Office in Somalia.  7. (U) Conference members agreed to constitute a ministerial committee to follow up on member states' financial contributions to develop Sudan's southern and war-torn areas.  The Conference also urged member states to provide urgent assistance to Sudan to help it address the humanitarian situation in Darfur.  ----------------------------------- To the International Community: Please Honor Pledges to Afghanistan -----------------------------------  8. (U) Citing previous donors' conferences in Tokyo (January 2002), Berlin (March 2004), and London (January/February 2006), the Conference appealed to the international community to honor its financial commitments to Afghanistan and welcomed Afghanistan's offer to host a Spring 2008 OIC conference on fighting international terrorism.  ---- Iran ----  9. (U) Quoting language used in previous OIC communiques, the 2007 statement notes that the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency enshrine the right of nations to develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.  The document calls for the peaceful resolution of the current controversy over Iran's nuclear capabilities.  The document claims growing pressure on Iran could negatively impact regional peace and security.   --------------------------------- Strategy to Counter Islamophobia ---------------------------------  10. (U) The brainstorming session on how to counter discrimination and intolerance against Muslims was a first for the OIC.  The Conference urged the Observatory of the OIC General Secretariat to establish a pro-active strategy and a roadmap for member states to follow.  A related initiative, the Turkey and Spain co-sponsored \"Alliance of Civilizations\", drew the Conference's praise for its work in facilitating dialogue \"emphasizing the common values of different cultures and religions.\"  The Conference urged the international community to support the initiative.  11. (U) Kazakhstan offered to host a ministerial in 2008 to promote dialogue between the Muslim World and the West.  ------------------------------------------ OIC Supports UN Recommendations for Kosovo ------------------------------------------  12. (U) Representatives at a pre-conference in Jeddah did not reach consensus on Albania's proposal to garner OIC support for Kosovo's independence, so it was one of the issues left to the Special Committee to resolve during the Islamabad  ISLAMABAD 00002348  003.2 OF 003   ministerial. Consensus on the following language was reached and is copied here in full from the communique.  BEGIN QUOTE: The Conference recognized that the Kosovo issue has entered into a new and crucial phase of the negotiations in the UN Security Council. It also recognized Mr. Ahtisaari's efforts and other contributions and considered that the outcome in this regard would contribute to the maintenance of the stability in Kosovo.  The Conference expressed its hope that the international community work together constructively on the issue of Kosovo, and called upon UNSC to address, on equal footing, all other issues pertaining to the maintenance of international peace and security. END QUOTE.  ------------------------------------------- Science and Technology Should Be a Priority -------------------------------------------  13. (U) The Conference called on member states to contribute at least one percent of their Gross Domestic Product to promoting science and technology to helping build knowledge-based economies while developing information technology to international standards.  ------------------------------ Next Ministerial In Uganda Next Islamic Summit in Senegal ------------------------------  14. (U) Next year's ministerial conference will be in Kampala, Uganda at a date to be determined.  The 11th Session of the Islamic Summit Conference (the highest OIC decision making body -- it meets once every three years) will take place 13-14 March in Dakar, Senegal. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2344", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/30/2007 11:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002378  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: DISARMING KARACHI: A WORTHY BUT CURRENTLY UNLIKELY GOAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 2344  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Karachi remains calm in the aftermath of May 12, in which at least 45 people were killed in political-related violence (reftel). On May 29, the paramilitary Sindh Rangers returned to their original deployments in interior Sindh. (Note: Approximately 4000 Rangers had been called to Karachi to keep the peace after the May 12 violence. End Note.)  2. (U) On May 25, President Musharraf publicly asked the Sindh provincial government to enact a comprehensive strategy to disarm Karachi. The President addressed a high-level meeting at the Sindh Chief Minister's house and called upon the provincial officials to start a campaign to make Karachi and its political parties \"weapons free\". He also directed officials to maintain religious harmony and to improve security in the provincial capital. Musharraf noted that previous attempts to disarm failed because only ordinary law-abiding citizens gave up their weapons, while \"anti-social\" individuals eluded authorities.  3. (C) Reactions to Musharraf's statements have been generally skeptical. Sindh Chief Minister Arbab Ghulam Raheem called the plan to disarm Karachi flatly impossible. Most political commentators and journalists cited the disastrous failure of the 2001 call to disarm Karachi. Many editorialists claimed that after the bloody late 1980s and early 1990s, when at least 10,000 Karachites died in political and sectarian violence, Karachi only found equilibrium through various parties being equally well armed. The commentators worry that disarming only one party-- perhaps the Muttahida Quami Movement-- could lead to an emboldened (and already armed) Jamaat-i-Islaami.  4. (C) Comment. Karachi is a stark reminder of the preeminent importance of our law enforcement training programs. Some political parties in Sindh are better trained and equipped than the police. The only organization that currently would be capable of taking on Karachi's political parties is the Army -- an option antithetical to our and Musharraf's goals of encouraging a civilian-led government and culture. Civilian law enforcement agencies must develop their capacity to take on violent elements whether religious, political, or criminal. Helping them improve this capacity is an important goal for all donor countries, including the US. End Comment.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/31/2007 13:13", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 002401  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2017 TAGS: ASEC, KDEM, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL, PINS SUBJECT: UPDATE ON MUSHARRAF'S POLITICAL SITUATION  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (SBU)  Frequently Asked Questions about President Musharraf's current political problems.  2.  (C)  Q:  Is Musharraf in as much trouble as some Western journalists indicate?  A:  No, but he is not as strong politically as he was four or five months ago. 2007 is an election year in Pakistan, and the Pakistani press and Musharraf's political opponents are beating him up pretty soundly.  Ironically, the political atmosphere is an indicator of how much Pakistan has changed since 1999. The press is very free and seemingly ubiquitous. Freedom of protest and assembly is relatively unhindered. The parliamentary opposition and the high courts operate robustly.  As in many democracies, the incumbent bears the brunt of all this freedom.  3.  (C)  Q:  So what is the opposition complaining about, exactly?  A:  Musharraf's \"leadership crisis\" (his advisors' term) has three major components:  --The people around him admit the government handled the reference against the Chief Justice badly.  Musharraf underestimated the will of the legal community and other judges to fight what they viewed as executive interference into judicial prerogatives such as disciplining their own members.  Additionally, the government -- especially the police -- badly handled the first few days of protests during the Chief Justice controversy.  Since then, officials have learned to allow the protests to move forward peacefully and not to interfere with journalists.  May 31 stories in the international press about plans to curb protests appear baseless (septel).  --The May 11-14 violence in Karachi damaged Musharraf's reputation. His attempts to assign blame for the fighting on political parties other than coalition partner MQM backfired, as even his own supporters acknowledge that the MQM precipitated violence.  Attempting to blame the Chief Justice for the May 12 deaths has rung particularly hollow with the public.  --Civilian deaths in Afghanistan hurt Musharraf's standing with the more conservative sections of society and with those opinion makers who believe the U.S. should withdraw from the country.  --While the controversy surrounding the Red Mosque and its adjoining women's seminary is a sexy story that Pakistani and Western reporters love to report, it has not reverberated broadly in Pakistan.  Most Pakistanis do not accept the teachings of the Red Mosque, but they also would oppose police action against a madrassa full of girls. Thus, the status quo of seemingly perpetual negotiations between mosque leaders and government officials is acceptable to the public.  4.  (C)  Q:  Should we worry about serious reactions to the \"crisis\"?  A:  Embassy contacts inside and outside the military do not believe a coup is likely.  Indeed, it is striking how few rumblings of \"possible military action\" there have been in recent months.  Given Pakistan's history of martial takeovers, coup rumors normally are a staple of Pakistani political life, but not during this crisis.  More importantly, we have not met a Pakistan Military officer who has not extolled to us the need for credible elections this fall and a smooth transition to civilian rule at some point. Some officers have quietly begun adding their voices to the  ISLAMABAD 00002401  002 OF 003   many retired military officials who frequently call on President Musharraf to remove his uniform and transition to a civilian Presidency.  Our Pakistan Army contacts tell us they believe Pakistan needs a smooth transition to civilian rule to build the government's credibility with Pakistanis and with the international community.  5.  (C)  Q:  Will Musharraf declare a state of emergency?  A:  Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat and National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz tell us the President has analyzed different types of emergencies he could declare constitutionally.  According to Shujaat, legal options range from a three month suspension of habeas corpus and right of assembly to a one year emergency that would result in a postponement of all elections.  Contacts tell us that, after the April 28 suicide bombing in Charsadda that injured Interior Minister Sherpao and his son, some PML officials encouraged Musharraf to declare a three month limited emergency so that the government could round up terrorists without having to deal with the religious parties' demonstrating against the arrests.  (Note:  Such an emergency also would have ended the lawyers' protests against the government's handling of the Chief Justice's suspension -- a bonus for the PML.  End Note.)  The President ignored the advice, but he could return to the possibility in the future.  Shujaat tells us the President has already decided that any state of emergency would have to be short enough to allow elections to proceed as required constitutionally.  The President himself has told us that the only way he would consider a one year state of emergency would be if the U.S. attacked Iran.  (Such an attack would potentially destabilize the Pakistani street.)  6.  (C)  Q:  So the elections will take place as planned?  A:  The best prediction is still that the Presidential election will occur in October and the parliamentary election in December.  Some of Musharraf's advisors would like to move the parliamentary election earlier, in part so it would occur before the public's perception of the PML deteriorates any further.  Various Western NGOs tell us the earliest the election commission could be ready, though, is October.  7.  (S)  Q:  And the nuclear arsenal?  A:  The arsenal is under the control of some of the most impressive officers in the Pakistan Military.  No matter what civilian government might come to power in the next year, we do not see the military's control of the arsenal changing. We continue to engage regularly with Pakistan on the security, accountability and control of sensitive nuclear materials.  8.  (C)  Q:  Should the U.S. be doing anything on the \"leadership crisis?\"  A:  Our private (very private) comments so far have focused on a few key points, which probably bear repeating:  --The openness of Pakistani society has improved markedly in recent years.  President Musharraf has created a formidable legacy of a free press and strengthening civil society.  The international community increasingly holds Pakistan to very high standards of press freedom and human rights.  As the election year progresses, this scrutiny will increase.  --The decision of many Western news outlets to open bureaus in Islamabad indicates the importance the West places on Pakistan.  The presence of so many journalists means that press freedom issues will remain highly reported.  --A credible investigation into the May 12 violence in  ISLAMABAD 00002401  003 OF 003   Karachi would seem to be in keeping with the increasing openness of Pakistani society.  --Credible elections will cement the legacy of this administration.  Continued dialogue with the opposition on how to design a framework for such elections is in everyone's mutual interest.      BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "5/31/2007 13:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002402  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/31/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, ASEC, PK SUBJECT: PRESS COVERAGE OF BAN ON LARGE GATHERINGS MISSES THE POINT  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b),(d)  1. (C) On May 30, the Islamabad district administration issued an official Section 144 order banning \"all kinds of gatherings of five or more people\" inside Islamabad for two months. Breathless press reports described the order as a new and dangerous decision, but in reality the document merely renewed an order that had been in effect in Islamabad for over two months. (Note:  The existence of such an order has not curtailed public protests in Islamabad during this period.  Anti-government protests in front of the Supreme Court, some attracting up to 10,000 persons, have been a regular feature of Islamabad life since the Chief Justice controversy began on March 8.  End Note.)  2. (C) On May 31, Islamabad Chief Commissioner Khalid Pervez told PolOff that Section 144 bans were a \"routine affair\" and were regularly renewed. He stressed that the local magistrate had the authority to and frequently did issue such bans. However, Pervez stressed that groups could apply for exemption permits that allowed specific gatherings, including protest marches. He indicated such exemptions were routinely approved.  3. (C) Senior Superintendent of Police (Security) told press that enforcing the Section 144 ban allowed police to close streets around the protests and to monitor \"suspected elements\" at check points. Check points have become particularly crucial as the frequency of suicide bombings increased, noted the Superintendent.  4.  (C)  Comment:  Government of Pakistan officials seemed surprised when international media coverage of the section 144 renewal exploded on May 31.  We continue to remind officials that the world is watching Pakistan's human rights performance and that it should be sensitive to even the insinuation of potential crackdowns.  Of course, it appears that in this case, the insinuation was much worse than the reality. End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/1/2007 10:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002435  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PK SUBJECT: SHUJAAT'S HEALTH  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  During a June 1 meeting, Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain told us that, because of the political problems facing Musharraf, the President had insisted Shujaat cancel a recent trip to Germany, where he was to receive his regularly scheduled Botox treatment for his health problems.  (Note:  We have heard Shujaat has Parkinson's disease, though he has not bluntly told us this. End Note.)  Shujaat said he had postponed his Germany trip until mid-June, after the budget vote.  Perhaps because of the lack of treatment, Shujaat could not keep one eye open during the meeting and demonstrated tremors we have not seen recently.  He also walked stiffly.  2.  (C)  Shujaat will attend an unspecified medical convention in Istanbul next week, despite the President's request he not go.  We note the 11th International Conference on Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders will be held in Istanbul June 3-7.  3.  (C)  His health problems and obvious discomfort notwithstanding, Shujaat's kindness and courtly manners were on display.  He walked from the second floor to the first to greet us when we arrived, and he insisted on walking us downstairs to say good-bye. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07KARACHI401", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/4/2007 12:42", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002467  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: MQM FEELING WOUNDED  REF: A. KARACHI 0401       B. ISLAMABAD 02193 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) On June 1, Charge met with Minister of Ports and Shipping (and MQM member) Babar Khan Ghauri to discuss the May 11-13 violence in Karachi.  Ghauri said the Karachi violence had \"killed\" the MQM's chances of gaining voters in Punjab province.  The party was focusing on repairing its reputation in Karachi and Sindh.  2.  (C) According to Ghauri, police and Sindh Rangers were stationed at key \"buffer\" points in Karachi on May 12, anticipating clashes between opposition and MQM activists. At around 2:00 a.m., the officers abandoned their positions. (Note:  The Rangers, like the Karachi police, might have been under local orders not to intervene (ref A).  End Note.) Ghauri reported that on May 13, after a phone call with Governor of Sindh Ishrat-ul-Ebad, President Musharraf ordered police and rangers onto the streets in Karachi.  Ghauri also said Musharraf asked PML-Q coalition partners to maintain a public posture that would not cause undue political damage to the MQM.  Regarding whether MQM head Altaf Hussain played any part in planning the violence, Ghauri said \"No, absolutely not.  We were trying to expand into Punjab; how would we have benefited from this?\"  (Note:  Reliable Embassy and Consulate Karachi contacts believe that at the very least Hussain suspected there would be violence on May 12 and supported the MQM counter-rally in any case.  End Note.)  3.  (C) Comment:  Ghauri confirmed what in-country MQM leader Farooq Sattar told us in a May 17 phone call (ref C):  the events of May 11-13 in Karachi deeply wounded the MQM. Ghauri noted several times during the meeting that his party's leadership felt \"alone\" and that they were worried the PML-Q would abandon them.  Indeed, a number of PML-Q contacts privately tell us they believe MQM was culpable for the events, and the PML-Q should distance itself from the MQM to prevent damage to its own reputation.  Nevertheless, President Musharraf and some other government officials continue to blame the opposition and Chief Justice for the May 12 violence.  Given that much of the public and media believe the MQM principally responsible for the violence, Musharraf's position could exacerbate his political problems.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647|07ISLAMABAD1688|07ISLAMABAD1846|07ISLAMABAD2270|07ISLAMABAD2334", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/4/2007 13:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002468  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: IMAM OF THE KAABA CONDEMNS THE RED MOSQUE'S LEADERSHIP  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2334      B. ISLAMABAD 2270      C. ISLAMABAD 1846      D. ISLAMABAD 1688      E. ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C)  Background:  Reftels describe the situation at Islamabad's Red Mosque, where two imams have for several months been encouraging male and female madrassah students to engage in vigilante justice.  The situation at the women's madrassah, which is located in the heart of Islamabad and is home to between 2,000 and 3,000 girls and women, has gained particularly profuse media attention.  Reftels are being retransmitted to addressees not previously on distribution. End Background.  2.  (C)  On June 2, the Imam of the Kaaba Shaikh Abdur Rehman al-Sudais publicly appealed to the Red Mosque administration to cease illegal tactics. The remarks were made in Islamabad during the Imam's six-day tour of Pakistan. (Note: The Imam is the prayer leader at the holiest site in Islam, the Kaaba.  End Note.)  2. (C) The Imam stressed that Islam does not allow mosques to be used for grandstanding. He characterized the Red Mosque's activities as leading to chaos and anarchy. The Imam stressed that the Red Mosque leadership should peacefully resolve grievances with the government, with city officials, and with religious scholars. He also condemned the Red Mosque brigade for using women and children in its actions.  3.  (C)  Both in his public statements and his well-attended Friday khutba (sermon) at Islamabad's huge Faisal Mosque, Shaikh al-Sudais called on the Muslim world to unite in eschewing extremism, sectarianism, and violence.  He emphasized the Islamic principles of brotherhood, compassion, and consideration for others.  4. (C) In response, the Red Mosque leadership invited the Imam to visit their mosque and see their \"realities\". They claimed the government had misled him about their activities. Red Mosque leader Maulana Abdul Aziz also declared that the Imam was Amir-ul-Mumineen (leader of the faithful) and should replace President Musharraf. Shaikh al-Sudais did not visit the Red Mosque or meet with its leaders.  5.  (C)  Comment:  President Musharraf and his advisors have a long-term strategy of turning public opinion against the Red Mosque's leaders and thus putting pressure on the Mosque to reform. The Imam-e-Kaaba's comments about the mosque appear to be part of Musharraf's plan to pressure the mosque to reform.  Indeed, we note that Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhray Hussain Shujaat, the architect of the Red Mosque strategy, served as the Imam's host for much of the visit.  End Comment   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/4/2007 13:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002469  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV, ASEC, PHUM SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE RALLY IN ABBOTTABAD DRAWS LARGE CROWD  Classified By: CDA Peter Bodde, For Reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1.  (SBU) Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry addressed a large crowd of lawyers and political activists on June 2 in Abbottabad, about 120 miles Northeast of Peshawar in the Northwest Frontier Province.  Reports of crowd numbers ranged from 15,000 to 25,000, and media contacts stated it took the Chief Justice over fourteen hours to reach Abbottabad from Islamabad.  (Note:  The Chief Justice's party stopped several times to meet with supporters along the way.  End Note.)  The Pakistan Peoples Party, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, the Awami National Party, and the Tehrik-i-Insaf were in attendance; each party reportedly set up receiving areas for members and potential recruits.  As always, the Jamaat-Islami party was the best organized.  2.  (C) Comment:  Abbottabad is a garrison city and home to Pakistan's military academy.  That the Government allowed the rally to proceed - and even provided security support - indicates that a predicted clampdown on freedom of assembly has not materialized.  The Abbottabad rally distinguished itself from recent Chief Justice demonstrations for two reasons:  It was better attended, and it was not broadcast live on cable television across Pakistan.  The rally's attendance numbers confirm that the anti-government movement, though far from unified, is not slowing down.  Post is closely following reports of the Government's decision to ban live broadcasting of the rally.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1779", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/5/2007 12:48", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002493  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2017 TAGS: KNNP, PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: MOVING FORWARD ON NUCLEAR REGULATORY COOPERATION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 01779       B. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY 0118-07  Classified By: CDA Peter Bodde, For Reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1.  (S) Summary:  On May 24 and May 31, PolOff met with Kamran Akhtar, Director of the Disarmament Cell at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to discuss cooperation between the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration and Pakistan's Nuclear Regulatory Agency. Akhtar said the Ministry would consider supporting nuclear cooperation between the two bodies, but that an interagency discussion of specifics, which would need to precede any formal cooperation, had not yet taken place.  Akhtar also noted Pakistan would consider participating in the Nuclear Smuggling International Technical Working Group meeting in Ume, Sweden in late June.  End Summary.  Interagency discussion needed -----------------------------  2.  (S) PolOff reviewed with Akhtar the Energy Department/Nuclear Regulatory Agency discussions that took place in March in Islamabad.  Akhtar indicated that any draft Memorandum of Understanding outlining specific areas of cooperation between the two bodies would need to be vetted through the Pakistan Military's Strategic Plans Division, the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, and the Foreign Ministry before the Chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Agency, Jamshed Hashmi, could sign the Memorandum.  Akhtar understood the purpose of the proposed June visit to Islamabad by Energy and State officials was to finalize details of the draft Memorandum and to discuss specific steps toward progress on a proposed action plan for cooperation.  That said, he was not hopeful the internal Pakistani discussion would be far enough along by then to merit such a visit.  The Ministry's concerns -----------------------  3.  (S) Akhtar noted his worry that some of the areas of cooperation in the draft Memorandum of Understanding were not under the purview of the Nuclear Regulatory Agency.  It would therefore be necessary to bring the Atomic Energy Commission into discussions and follow-up activities.  Akhtar was also concerned about how the general public and nuclear community would react to increased cooperation between the U.S. and Pakistan.  (Note:  Pakistani officials frequently voice this concern over the public's reaction to U.S.-Pakistan cooperation on nonproliferation matters.  The Foreign Ministry recently asked that all State Department-sponsored Export Control and Related Border Security (EXBS) training programs take place outside of Pakistan and under the public radar.  End Note.)  4.  (S) According to Akhtar, the Government of Pakistan would likely express concern over a proposal in the action plan to conduct joint security assessments of certain sites.  PolOff stressed it would be helpful to convey these concerns in writing.  5.  (S) PolOff raised the possibility of U.S.-Pakistan cooperation in removing U.S.-origin Highly Enriched Uranium fuel assemblies from Pakistan's PARR-1 nuclear reactor. Akhtar stated this proposal, like others, required interagency consideration.  (Note:  Akhtar hinted that while he understood Nuclear Regulatory Agency head Jamshed Hashmi supported U.S.-Pakistan cooperation to remove the spent assemblies, the opinion of the head of the Atomic Energy Commission would matter equally or more during interagency discussions.  End Note.)   ISLAMABAD 00002493  002 OF 002   6.  (S) Comment:  The Foreign Ministry's concerns over proposed U.S.-Pakistan nuclear cooperation are not new.  The Government of Pakistan would like to prove to the international community that it is cooperating robustly in training and other nonproliferation activities.  At the same time, the Pakistani bureaucracy is worried the public will think increased nuclear cooperation with the U.S. compromises Pakistan's national security interests.  We should continue to be sensitive to Pakistan's public affairs concerns on nonproliferation cooperation.  We will also ensure future discussions on nuclear nonproliferation activities include the Foreign Ministry and the Atomic Energy Commission to avoid misunderstandings.  Embassy looks forward to receiving from Washington an interagency-cleared draft Memorandum of Understanding on the terms of this cooperation.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2469", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/5/2007 13:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002494  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT PLACES RESTRICTIONS ON MEDIA  REF: ISLAMABAD 2469 (NOTAL)  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  UPDATE ON RESTRICTIONS  1.  (U) Pakistan's cable television operators report they are under continuing pressure (read \"requirement\") to block news broadcasts emanating from three television news networks. Most cable networks are complying with government directives that trickled down to cable owners on June 1.  On that day, all cable companies in Pakistan ceased airing ARY news, while AAJ TV became unavailable in 70 percent of the country. (Reftel.)  As of 1700 local June 5, ARY was available again throughout Pakistan.  We are attempting to ascertain whether the network is self-censoring.  2.  (C)  Late June 3, the government ordered cable operators to suspend GEO news transmissions after GEO aired two controversial programs, one on the final ruling days of the Shah of Iran and another quoting an official from the ruling Pakistan Muslim League as saying \"most parties think President Musharraf should take off his uniform and stand for elections after a new parliament is elected.\"  Late June 5, GEO was again available throughout Pakistan.  Observers were monitoring the government's reaction to potentially controversial news broadcasts scheduled for the evening of June 5.  3.  (C) Media contacts told us June 5 that the Ministry of Information had privately instructed broadcasters not to air \"objectionable\" content regarding the ongoing judicial crisis, the Pakistan Military, President Musharraf, or the May 12 violence in Karachi.  A contact at Khyber TV (protect) told us June 5 he had canceled a planned interview with Tehrik-e-Insaf leader Imran Khan because he feared the interview would violate the new rules.  (Khan is a forceful opponent of the President.)  The Khyber TV contact explained that his small station could not afford the lost revenue that would ensue if the government forced it off the air, even for a few hours.  4.  (C) Note:  While media contacts tell us the government has informed them directly of what is and is not acceptable content, the government's enforcement mechanism is through cable operators, who are being told to restrict access to potentially objectionable programs.  This means that persons with satellite or DSN access to cable channels, as well as persons receiving GEO, ARY, or AAJ in the Gulf States, have access to all news broadcasts, including those in violation of government policies.  End Note.  LEGALISMS  5. (U) Late last week, President Musharraf issued a presidential directive moving the until-then independent Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) to the direct authority of the Ministry of Information.  On June 4, Musharraf broadened the Media Authority's mandate to take action against television stations violating government directives.  The new rules grant the Media Authority power to seize broadcast or distribution equipment or to seal the premises of policy violators without consultation. Journalists, political parties, and non-governmental organizations protested against the new ordinance in Islamabad on June 4.  COMMENT  ISLAMABAD 00002494  002 OF 002    6.  (C)  We continue to be deeply troubled by the ongoing press restrictions, as well as by indications the government is considering limiting protest rallies.  (Pakistan Muslim League officials tell us restrictions on freedom of assembly are seriously under consideration.)  We have raised our concerns informally with various government and political officials, and we look forward to receiving formal instructions to officially approach the Government.  End Comment.  7.  (C)  Post is providing suggested press talking points via e-mail.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE65750", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/5/2007 13:28", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002495  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, KPKO, PK, SU SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: PAKISTAN MFA ON DARFUR PEACEKEEPING  REF: A. STATE 65750       B. ISLAMABAD 2083  1. (SBU) On June 4, PolOff delivered reftel points urging Pakistan to weigh in with the UN and the AU on the need for UN command and control of the proposed hybrid operation to MFA Director (UN-I) Haider Shah.  Shah said that the substance of our message made sense, as Pakistan has in the past also called for a more unified command in UN peacekeeping operations.  He said that failing to resolve command and control issues in advance of a hybrid operation would be diastrous for the mission.  Shah said that he would consult with Pakistan Army headquarters because they would have to support any decision to send peacekeepers.  He pointed out that the challenges to the hybrid operation were political as well as technical, meaning that the AU must be seen as an important component of the operation.  Echoing what Foreign Secretary Khan said about the Darfur mission last month (ref B), Shah concluded that Pakistan would be deliberate in deciding how to contribute to a hybrid operation.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE60238", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2007 10:45", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 002520  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  TREASURY FOR OTI -RLOEFFLER  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2017 TAGS: KNNP, EFIN, IR, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S ACTION ON BANK SEPAH  REF: A. STATE 60238       B. STATE 40440  1. (U) Classified By: Economic Counselor Mary Townswick for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).  2. (S) On June 4 Econoff and Poloff spoke with Kamran Akhtar, Director, Disarmament Cell, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, concerning Pakistan's action in reference to Bank Sepah's (BS) and Bank Sepah International's (BSI) 1747 designation (Ref A). Akhtar stated that on March 25 the Ministry of Finance sent instructions to all banks in Pakistan to freeze any assets of BS and BSI. On April 3, the statutory notification was published in The Gazette of Pakistan. The banks reported back that there were no assets of either of these organizations in Pakistan.  Akhtar did confirm Habib Bank Limited (HBL) and United Bank Limited (UBL) had correspondent banking relations with BS and BSI in order to facilitate fund transfers to the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), headquartered in Tehran; however, after the designation of BS and BSI, they were instructed to find a new bank through which to transfer funds.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE77589", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2007 12:48", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 002525  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: POINTS DELIVERED TO SENIOR OFFICIALS  REF: STATE 77589  Classified By: CDA Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (S) On June 6, Charge delivered reftel points to President Musharraf's Deputy Chief of Staff, Major General Akhtar Iqbal, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz, and Ministry of Foreign Affairs Additional Secretary for the Americas Shahid Kamal.  The Acting Deputy Chief of Mission delivered the points to Minister of Information Mohammad Ali Durrani.  Each recipient acknowledged the United States' concern and promised to pass the points to the senior-most levels of the government.  2.  (S) Comment:  We believe it would be appropriate for the Department's Spokesperson to note that the United States has officially conveyed to the Government of Pakistan our serious concerns over reports of recently imposed limitations on freedom of the press and of assembly.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2494", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2007 14:40", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002526  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PREL, PK SUBJECT: WHAT HAPPENED TO PRESS FREEDOM IN PAKISTAN?  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2494       B. STATE 77589      C. ISLAMABAD 1354  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde for reasons 1.4(b), (d)  1. (C) On March 24, President Musharraf told Ambassador Crocker that Musharraf intended to fire the head of the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Agency (PEMRA), whose heavy handed interventions during the early stages of the Chief Justice controversy had been \"unhelpful and wrong\" (ref C).  Indeed, after PEMRA interfered with GEO television broadcasts in early March, Minister of Information Durrani apologized, and after the police stormed the Islamabad offices of GEO television and broke expensive equipment, Musharraf apologized.  The apologies, and subsequent affirmations that the government was completely committed to press freedom, were accompanied by actions indicating the government was sincere. During the March 24 meeting, Musharraf even stated he was planning to hire a public relations expert to help Information Minister Durrani better package the government's message to Paksitan's vibrant press.  2. (C) So why, if on March 24 the government supported press freedom, on June 1 did it begin to seriously restrict those liberties?  The hypotheses revolve around three events.  MAY 12:  THE POWER OF LIVE TELEVISION  3. (C) Live coverage of the May 12 bloodshed in Karachi, including footage of people slowly bleeding to death while ambulances were unable to move past overturned vehicles and other roadblocks, shocked Pakistan.  Commentators on the scene reported that no police could be seen on the street. As the live reporting progressed, journalists continuously restated rumors that the MQM city government had ordered officers off the street or had ordered that they not carry weapons.  The images of May 12 damaged the government, as MQM is a coalition partner.  PROTEST RALLIES:  THE COVERAGE GOES ON ALL DAY  4. (C) Live coverage of the various Chief Justice rallies also bothered the government.  Camera angles often made crowds shouting anti-Musharraf slogans appear larger than they were.  The Chief Justice's practice of taking hours and hours to drive slowly to the site of the rallies means that the live coverage often lasts the entirety of a Saturday. Some government officials believe that certain reporters are purposefully manipulating coverage of the rallies to build the morale of the opposition parties.  CRITICIZING THE ARMY:  IT'S JUST NOT DONE HERE  5. (C) The last straw, in terms of rallies, appears to have been a Saturday, May 26 gathering when several speakers uncharacteristically offered execeptionally harsh comments about the army and about Musharraf's failure to remove his uniform.  Army officials are not used to being criticised, especially on live television.  SO WHO IS BEHIND THE CRACKDOWN?  6. (C) In short, everyone is trying to pin the blame on someone else.  Federal Minister of Railways Sheikh Rashid Ahmed, an unofficial government spokesman, told us June 5 that he supported the crackdown.  According to him, reports denigrating the army affected the morale of soldiers serving in difficult missions such as in South Waziristan.  He said that the army was a sensitive institution that took negative comments very personally.  (Note: President Musharraf has often made this same point to visiting Congressional delegations.  End note.)  Pakistan Muslim League President  ISLAMABAD 00002526  002 OF 002   Chaudrhay Shujaat Hussain told us June 1 that the military was being overly sensitive, and that they should realize that people were going to use increased freedom to vent frustrations.  According to Shujaat, the crackdown on the media was a result of pressure from senior military officers.  Meanwhile, Embassy military colleagues report that their contacts claim to oppose cracking down on the press.  Many military officers say they simply want the Chief Justice controversy to end without causing further harm to Pakistan's reputation.  7. (C) One persistent claim -- by government officials, opposition politicians, and journalists -- is that senior military figures in ISI and Military Intelligence, especially Director General for ISI Kiyani, are the strongest proponents of the media crackdown. These same interlocutors, though, can present no concrete reason the intelligence agencies would choose now to try to restrict the press.  When blame is hard to place and an easy explanation is elusive, standard Pakistani practice is to blame the intelligence agencies.  8. (C) COMMENT:  In light of the serious attention this issue continues to attract, we should remain constant in reminding the government of Pakistan that their actions to restrict press freedom can only serve to undercut their own short- and long-term political best interests.  END COMMENT.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07KABUL1868", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/6/2007 15:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002527  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR DAS GASTRIGHT NSC FOR HARRIMAN OSD FOR SHIVERS CENTCOM FOR CJTF-82 POLAD  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/06/2017 TAGS: PK, AF, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: PAKISTAN SUPPORTS A CREDIBLE JIRGA  REF: KABUL 01868  Classified By: CDA Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) On June 6, Charge met with Minister of Culture (and Jirga Commission member) GG Jamal to discuss recent meetings between the Afghan and Pakistani Jirga Commissions.  Jamal emphasized the commissions made significant progress, finalizing an agenda for the planned August jirga and bridging gaps on sensitive issues.  At the same time, Jamal was concerned about Afghanistan's desire for international participation.  He stressed that tribal leaders in Pakistan were already questioning the credibility of the jirga, and including UN and/or U.S. representatives in the jirga's proceedings - whether as observers or participants - would feed tribal perceptions that the jirga was \"another plot by the West\" not to be taken seriously.  Traditionally, Jamal explained, there were no observers at jirgas, only participants.  2.  (C) Jamal said the Afghan Jirga Commission also raised the prospect of participation of women in the August jirga. Both commissions worried about how women's participation would play with the majority of participants.  Both sides also expressed desire to respect, to the maximum extent possible, the format of traditional jirgas.  Jamal said allowing female participants would add a new, unfamiliar, and potentially discomfiting dimension to the jirga process. (Note:  Jamal is one of the most liberal Pashtuns we know. We believe his comments reflect his desire for a successful jirga, not any negative views toward women.  End Note.)  3.  (C) Comment:  Pakistan believes in holding a credible joint jirga that initiates on-going cross-border dialogue on stemming militancy, fighting poppy cultivation and trafficking, and strengthening people-to-people as well as governmental ties.  Without taking steps to ensure the August jirga remains credible in the eyes of its participants, Pakistani Jirga Commission members feel this initial meeting will not live up to its expectations.  We believe Pakistan's concerns over international participation in the jirga are legitimate and should be given serious consideration.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07Islamabad1776", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2007 5:21", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002530  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  G/TIP FOR SHEREEN FARAJ  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, ELAB, KCRM, PHUM, PREL, SMIG, KWMN, PK SUBJECT:  SUBMISSION OF G/TIP PROPOSALS -- PAKISTAN  REF: Islamabad 1776  1.  SUMMARY: Following are summaries of three anti-trafficking in persons proposals received by Embassy Islamabad for consideration for funding from G/TIP-managed FY07 funds to strengthen Pakistan's efforts in combating trafficking in persons.  As requested, post forwarded the original proposals to G/TIP program analyst Shereen Faraj by unclassified e-mail.  END SUMMARY.  2.  Pakistan is a Tier 2 country.  The government is making strong efforts to combat trafficking in persons through increased prosecution of traffickers, protection of victims and the prevention of trafficking.  As detailed in recent TIP reports, Pakistan is a source, transit, and destination country, particularly prone to cross-border trafficking activities along its porous borders with Afghanistan and India.  The GOP has demonstrated political will to combat this problem in partnership with NGOs and international organizations, but lacks the necessary resources.  3.  The projects summarized below address critical trafficking issues and deficiencies noted in Pakistan's TIP report and are designed to improve public awareness as well as strengthen victim protection and assistance services.  They are action-oriented, with direct application to improving Pakistan's response to TIP.  The three applications are from reputable, highly respected organizations with a demonstrated record of commitment to and experience in combating trafficking in persons as well as proven capacity to implement USG-supported anti-trafficking projects.  The Mission has worked with all three organizations.  In addition, we consulted with UNIFEM regarding an impressive regional project that they planned to present directly to the G/TIP office in the Department, as per the rules governing regional proposals.   PROPOSAL 1:  International Organization for Migration (IOM) -------------------------------------- 1.  Name of Applicant:  International Organization for Migration  2.  Requested funding amount:  USD 212,205 (all USG resources)  3.  Project Title:  \"CREATION OF COUNTER HUMAN TRAFFICKING DISTRICT TASK FORCES AND SUPPORT TO THE FEDERAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY ANTI-TRAFFICKING UNITS\"  4. Project Duration: 12 months  5. Project Abstract:  This project, developed in partnership with the Federal Investigation Agency, has a national and district level focus.  It strengthens the capacity of all stakeholders and builds a common platform in those districts in Pakistan known as source and transit destinations for victims of trafficking. The districts have been selected according to the IOM report 'Collection and Compilation of Human Trafficking Data' in Pakistan.  Additionally, the project will provide technical, rehabilitative, and procurement support to the seven Anti-Trafficking Units located in Pakistan.  The project will strengthen counter trafficking interventions in prevention and protection through developing indigenous institutional capacity within the stakeholder framework. The integrated approach between stakeholders will create an informed community from the top down and facilitate a vigilant reporting mechanism in conjunction with the available referral support for victims of trafficking. Furthermore, it will supplement existing information networks for the established ATUs of Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) on trafficking.  The capacity of the FIA ATUs will be enhanced to respond to the needs of informed communities through the provision of much-needed linkages among its ATUs and support to help make them functional and to have a greater impact.  Twelve taskforce committees will be formed in the districts notorious as source and transit locales for TIP, led by a focal non-governmental organization (NGO).  A training of trainers (TOT) manual specific to the Pakistan context for training the taskforce committee will be developed and the training will be provided by IOM. The same training will consequently be replicated by the focal NGOs six times each in their respective district. The taskforce meetings will serve as monitoring body against TIP in these districts.  Goal  To effectively curtail human trafficking in Pakistan by strengthening the capacity of the Anti-Trafficking Units nationally, and creating linkages between stakeholders through the establishment of a taskforce in the most vulnerable districts of the country.  Objectives  --To assist in establishment of District Task Force (DTF) comprised of Law enforcement agencies, local NGOs, and other stakeholders --To develop a Pakistan specific manual from existing IOM materials and local resources for TOT on Prevention, Protection and Prosecution for DTF Members --To support training of stakeholders by DTF in 12 districts --To assist FIA in increasing the capacity of the ATUs  IOM will develop a training manual on all aspects of trafficking with a specific focus on identification of victim, trafficker, protection mechanisms, prevention methodologies, outreach activities, reporting to FIA officials, and prosecution of trafficker under the national legislation. The manual will be adapted from existing IOM materials.  The task force members will be provided TOT on the manual. The focal organization of taskforce will be supported to conduct the same training at the grassroots level. The Task Forces in the districts will comprise of the stakeholders already supported the previous IOM campaign in these districts, such as NGOs, local government representatives (Nazim), law enforcement agencies, FIA (not present in all these districts), local religious scholars (Imams), local school teachers, and the local elite. There will be 8-10 members. This Task Force will be the direct link to the community and prove to be an efficient and comprehensive tool in location and identification of the trafficker, recruiter and victims.  The project will evaluate the success of the project activities and monitor the growing capacity of these stakeholders in the targeted areas through participation in monthly meetings and the rate at which victims/aggressors are being referred to the Shelter Homes. The project will also spark independent activity and debate within the NGO sector and create indigenous capacity within them to develop and propose locally conceived counter trafficking initiatives in the future.  PROPOSAL 2: --------------------------------------------- ---------- 1.  Name of Applicant:  United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)  2.  Requested funding amount:  USD 295,000 (all USG)  3.  Project Title:  \"Increasing the number of investigations and prosecutions of trafficking in persons in Pakistan\"  4. Project Duration: 2 years  5. Project Abstract:  Pakistan has been identified as a destinations country for women and children from Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Iran, Myanmar, Nepal, the Philippines, Russia, Tajikistan, Thailand, and other countries of Central Asia. They are trafficked to Pakistan to work in farming, fishing and the sex industry.  Pakistan is also a country of transit for East Asians and Bangladeshis traveling westward to the Middle East. People are smuggled to Europe and the Middle East through Pakistan's remote border regions with Afghanistan and Iran.  The Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan prohibits all forms of forced labor and traffic in human beings. Trafficking has been criminalized by the Prevention and Control of Human Trafficking Ordinance. The ordinance defines \"human trafficking\" as \"obtaining, securing, selling, purchasing, recruiting, detaining, harboring, or receiving a person, notwithstanding his implicit or explicit consent, by the use of coercion, kidnapping, abduction or by giving or receiving any payment or benefit, or sharing or receiving a shore for such person's subsequent transportation out of or into Pakistan by any means whatsoever.\"  However, the implementation of the Prevention and Control of Human Trafficking Ordinance remains insufficient and penalties low. This has been recognized in the Pakistan Action Plan for Combating Human Trafficking of December 2005. This project aims to support the implementation of the Action Plan as well as the Prevention and Control of Human Trafficking Ordinance through strengthening the capacity of government law enforcement, prosecution and other criminal justice institutions as well as civil society responses to prevent, investigate and prosecute cases of human trafficking as well as protect victims in line with the requirements of the Trafficking Protocol.  Projected outcomes:  By the end of the project, an assessment report will be prepared on the trafficking in human beings in Pakistan. In the report, baseline data is compared with data collected at the end of the project. In addition to information identifying the main trafficking trends, the report includes recommendations on the policies for combating human trafficking, the infrastructure and referral mechanisms. By the end of the project, a training program designed for criminal justice practitioners and victim service providers on trafficking in persons in Pakistan. Particular emphasis is paid to prevention and prosecution of trafficking crimes and protection of victims. A minimum of 5 training seminars carried out within the operational anti-trafficking units, the Task Force on Human Trafficking, specialized prosecutors, selected judges in hotspot areas as well as respective national education institutions. By the end of the project, a computer-based training program designed for front-line law enforcement on trafficking in persons in Pakistan.   Main activities:   by the end of the 13th month, establishment of CBT centers, including the provision of hardware and software; by the end of the 16th month, designing three training modules anti-human trafficking; by the end of the 18th month, the CBT concept and methodology introduced to selected national law enforcement education institutions; by the end of the 22nd month, adopting the CBT training program as part of the current training curricula. By the end of the project, a law enforcement operation carried out by the operational anti-trafficking units together with relevant stakeholders to improve the identification and referral of victims as well as increase the number of investigations and prosecutions of trafficking cases. By the end of the project, international contacts identified and established for the exchange of information with the appropriate governmental and non-governmental organizations and agencies, with a focus on investigation, prosecution and victim protection in significant origin, transit and destination countries. By the end of the project, a National Forum convened with all relevant stakeholders to review progress made and to make recommendation on the implementation of the Action Plan for Combating Human Trafficking.  PROPOSAL 3:   Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan ------------------------------------- 1.  Name of Applicant:  Ministry of Interior (GOP)  2.  Requested funding amount:  USD  154,000  (all USG)  3.  Project Title:  \"Fully Implementing the MOI's Migration Management Cell\"  4. Project Duration: 2 years  5. Project Abstract:  The Ministry of Interior has established a Migration Management Cell which will work as a nerve centre to coordinate data from all agencies.  The data warehouse will constitute information on legal and illegal migrants; complete information on their cases; agents and gangs involved in trafficking; research on migration trends/flows and data analysis for generating policy parameters. The Cell has been established primarily to target victims (especially women and children) of trafficking by coordinating legal and medical assistance and provision of shelter where need be. Recognising the need to combat human trafficking there is a need to set up a project in the MMC dealing specially with Anti-Human Trafficking activities. The activities will include planning and executing capacity building of law enforcement agencies, etc. as well as awareness raising and coordinating activities with all stakeholders.  The Migration Management Cell has started preliminary work on the database with assistance from International Organization for Migration.  The Ministry has requested the Canadian International Development Agency's support to strengthen the Cell by provision of equipment and consultants who will develop the data warehouse. Support is also sought for developing a campaign to disseminate information through schools, colleges, universities, civil society organizations and media to prevent people from being exploited by unscrupulous agents into trafficking situations. The Ministry of Interior has already created a linkage with the Women Political School, a project of Ministry of Women's Development which is imparting training to 28,000 women councilors. This is a massive source of outreach to millions of women and children in Pakistan who can be educated about human trafficking and its implications.  Objectives of the Project: To develop a data warehouse to collect and store information on offenders, victims and migration agents To use the comprehensive information to formulate the Migration Management Policy in consultation with other stakeholders including Ministry of Women Development, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Information, Planning Division, Media & local and international organizations.  To coordinate and ensure provision of shelter, legal and medical assistance for victims (especially women and children).  To streamline regular migration through dissemination of information about employment opportunities abroad and prevent people from proceeding overseas through illegal channels.  BODDE 1      2 " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2007 12:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002544  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: POLICE ARREST HUNDREDS THROUGHOUT PUNJAB PROVINCE   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) According to media reports, Pakistani police have arrested between 800 and 1,200 people -- mostly political party workers -- throughout Punjab over the last few days. Rahat Quddusi, special advisor to Punjab's Chief Minister, said that the arrests are an effort to maintain law and order, and the decision to crack down was made at a meeting held last Friday chaired by Punjab's Inspector General of Police.  Those picked up, Quddusi said, were on a watch list compiled by Pakistan's intelligence agencies.  2. (U) Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto publicly condemned the arrest of her party's political activists -- which by mid-day June 7 totalled approximately 200, according to People's Party officials.  Bhutto said that the arrests were a result of her party's decision to support the Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists in its observation of a \"black day\" in protest against the government's recent curbs against the media.  Other political parties, including Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz, Pakistan Tehrik-e-Insaf, and members of the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal coalition are claiming their party workers have also been arrested.  3. (C) Comment: Police roundups of political party workers ahead of protest rallies have been common, and workers are generally released after the end of the protest.  The latest round of arrests show that the government is worried about the possible confluence of protests -- in support of the Chief Justice and against the restrictions on press freedom. End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE21535", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2007 13:08", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002545  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR ISN/WMDT ANDREW GRANT  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KNNP, PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: PAKISTAN JOINS GLOBAL INITIATIVE TO COMBAT NUCLEAR TERRORISM  REF: STATE 21535  1.  (U) On June 7, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs officially communicated by Note Verbale the Government of Pakistan's endorsement of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.  Pakistan intends to participate in the June 11-12 Global Initiative meeting in Astana, Kazakhstan.  One official, either Additional Secretary for UN Affairs (and long-time nonproliferation policy advisor) Tariq Osman Haider, or Pakistan's Ambassador to Kazakhstan, Irfan Ur Rehman, will attend the conference in Astana.  2.  (U) Following is a section of the text of Pakistan's Note Verbale endorsing the Global Initiative:  \"Pakistan, while endorsing the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, reaffirms the voluntary commitments of the Statement of Principles and declares its understanding that the Global Initiative does not cover Pakistan's military nuclear facilities or activities.\"  (Note:  The language of Pakistan's endorsement was negotiated between Department and Pakistani officials over email in late May 2007.  End Note.)   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2378", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2007 13:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002546  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/07/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: IMRAN KHAN TAKES ON THE MQM IN THE UK  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2378       B. ISLAMABAD 2344      C. ISLAMABAD 2193      D. ISLAMABAD 2175      E. ISLAMABAD 2157  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (SBU) On June 3, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf (PTI) chief Imran Khan held a press conference in the UK and submitted a petition to the British government asking it to hold Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) leader Altaf Husain accountable under UK anti-terror laws. (Note. The MQM is a coalition partner in the government and its stronghold is in Karachi. Its leader, Altaf Husain, is a British citizen and lives in self-imposed exile in London. End note.) After an hour-long demonstration by 300 people, PTI leaders also presented a memorandum to 10 Downing Street alleging that Altaf Husain was responsible for numerous incidents of torture and murder in Pakistan. Khan met with important British legislators and called upon them to investigate the charges within 90 days and hold Husain guilty for terrorism abroad. Khan's legal team is also preparing a civil suit to be filed in London against Husain.  2. (C) Background. Reftels desribe the May 12 armed clashes between political gangs in Karachi that left over 40 people dead. In the aftermath of the violence, all opposition political parties have been calling on Musharraf's government to take action against the MQM, whom they believe planned and executed the violence. Many in both the opposition and the government have called for an independent inquiry into the events. The government has not yet taken any serious actions to hold parties accountable for the May 12 violence. End Background.  3. (C) Imran Khan's fight against the MQM is deeply personal. Khan's Political Secretary Saif Niazi told PolOff that nine PTI party members were wounded by gun fire during the May 12 violence. More recently graffiti slurs against Khan appeared all over Karachi and on May 26 the MQM-dominated provincial government banned the PTI leader from Sindh for one month. Niazi shared PTI's two-pronged legal strategy against Husain in the UK: first that Altaf Husain materially supported and ordered terrorism in Pakistan and second that Husain made his wealth from ill-gotten extortion gains from his gangs in Karachi.  4. (C) Niazi said that Imran Khan's leadership on this emotional issue has caused a ground swell of support for him abroad and also in Pakistan. He suggested that some undecided voters may turn to the PTI in the upcoming elections because of the events of May 12, but noted that it will be a challenge to transform general support into actual electoral support. Niazi outlined PTI's platform as focusing on an independent judiciary, transparent political systems, and aid for the disenfranchised. Additionally, he hinted that negotiations were ongoing between PTI and Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League faction (PML-N) for seat adjustments in the next general elections.  5. (C) PML-N and religious coalition Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) leaders publicly announced their support for Khan's actions in London. Pakistan People's Party (PPP) contacts tell PolOff that they support Khan's action against Altaf Husain, but do not support the rest of his platform.  6. (C) Comment. PTI is a minor party. They hold only one seat in the National Assembly and one seat in NWFP's provincial assembly. It is unlikely that they will gain significantly more seats in the upcoming elections. Khan's personal popularity as a former cricket star endears him to many  ISLAMABAD 00002546  002 OF 002   Pakistanis and he is media-savvy, but he enjoys far more support by expats than by actual voters. A deal with the PML-N would be attractive to Khan, as it would allow the PTI to distance itself from the religious party Jamaat-e-Islami (JI). (Note. PTI currently depends on its affiliation with the JI for votes. End note.) Although Khan's case against Altaf Husain has gained some degree of international media attention, it caused only a ripple in Pakistan's domestic political scene. The credible and independent continuation of the Sindh High Court's inquiry into the May 12 incidents would be a more effective means of healing the emotional and political wounds of the Karachi violence. End comment.      BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2526", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/7/2007 13:24", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002547  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN MEDIA SITUATION: JUNE 7 UPDATE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2526       B. ISLAMABAD 2494  1. (SBU) MEDIA PROTESTS IN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.  Evening of June 6, the Pakistani press corps that regularly covers the National Assembly began a \"walk-out\" from the Assembly to protest the new PEMRA ordinance regulating the electronic media (see para 2).  According to a media contact, while Parliamentary Affairs Minister Sher Afgan Niazi and Minister of State for Information and Broadcasting Tariq Azeem attempted to talk to the journalists, a crew from PTV was filming non-journalists who had filled some of the seats in the press gallery.  Several journalists returned to the press gallery and asked these non-journalists to leave.  A \"fight\" or \"altercation\" ensued. PTV carried fotage of the brawl on June 7.  No one was arrested or detained.  A media contact, however, told the Embassy that the National Asembly has rescinded all journalists' credentials and will issue new ones.  The media contact's expectation is that re-issuance will be \"selective.\"  2. (SBU) NEW PEMRA ORDINANCE WILL NOT GO INTO EFFECT PENDING INDEPENDENT COMMITTEE REVIEW.  Prime Minister Aziz chaired a meeting late June 7 with other senior members of the government (Information Minister Durrani, Information Secretary Anwar Mahmood and PML-Q Secretary General Mushahid  SIPDIS Hussain) and leaders of major media associations All Pakistan Neswpapers Society (APNS) and Pakistan Broadcasters Association (PBA).  They agreed to form a six member committee to review the PEMRA  ordinance.  The Prime Minister also agreed that the government would not take any actions under the new ordinance until the committee reports to the Pruime Minister.  No date was set, but the committee agreed that a report should be submitted \"in the shortest possible time.\"  3. (U) GOVERNMENT WITHDRAWS CASE AGAINST PROTEST BY 200 JOURNALISTS.  Separately, Prime Minister Aziz ordered the withdrawal of a case that had been filed Monday against 200 journalists who had demonstrated in front of the Prime Minister's Secretariat on June 4.  4. (SBU) PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF  was scheduled to address the nation tonight.  This was published in several papers today. Media contacts told us this afternoon (June 7), however, that the President has \"changed his mind\" and \"may address the nation in a few days.\"  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/8/2007 11:14", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002572  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: NEW POLL SHOWS WEAK SUPPORT FOR MUSHARRAF IN URBAN PUNJAB  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) On May 15-28, just days after political violence in Karachi left 40 people dead, the International Republican Institute (IRI) polled 1,500 Pakistanis in six cities throughout Punjab, Pakistan's most populous province. Polling questions, which had been developed weeks earlier with the help of the head of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League, Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, included questions about elections, the popularity of individual politicians and political parties, and current political issues, such as the Chief Justice controversy.  2. (C) This is the first time that IRI has polled exclusively on these questions in only these six urban Punjab districts. While disaggregation of data for these areas from earlier provincial wide polls is in process, the absence of a one-to-one comparative baseline limits the utility of this poll for showing trends of support over time.  Nevertheless, the polling results show weak support for President Musharraf.  When asked whether President Musharraf should be re-elected, respondents in four of the six cities polled opposed it.  The strongest opposition was in the industrial city of Gujranwala (71 percent) and the district capital of Lahore (64 percent).  In Islamabad's sister city of Rawalpindi, 57 percent opposed Musharraf's re-election.  In Faisalabad, Pakistan's third most populous city, 52 percent opposed it.  Musharraf's strongest support was in the historic city of Multan, where 73 percent of respondents supported his re-election.  The Siraiki city of Bahawalpur straddled the middle, with 49 percent of respondents supporting Musharraf's re-election and 48 percent opposed. Respondents from the same four cities who opposed Musharraf's re-election also opposed Musharraf's intention to stand for re-election before the current assemblies (Gujranwala, 71 percent; Lahore, 66 percent; Rawalpindi, 64 percent; Faisalabad, 57 percent).  3. (C) When asked about President Musharraf's decision to suspend the Chief Justice, respondents in all six cities opposed it by a clear majority. Even Multan, which consistently supported President Musharraf and the ruling Pakistan Muslim League throughout the rest of the poll, opposed the Chief Justice's suspension by 70 percent. Opposition to the Chief Justice's suspension was highest in Rawalpindi (85 percent), followed by Bahawalpur (73 percent), Lahore and Multan (both 70 percent), Gujranwala (69 percent), and Faisalabad (62 percent).  4. (C) IRI has not yet presented the results to the Pakistan Muslim League (they plan to do so by Sunday).  IRI Resident Country Director Robert Varsalone told PolOff that while he is still cross-checking the data, it appears that the weak support for Musharraf's ruling Pakistan Muslim League has not translated to an increased number of likely voters for other political parties.  Rather, there are large number of respondents who selected \"Don't know/No response\" for which political party they would support in upcoming elections.  5. (C) Comment: The poll demonstrates that the Chief Justice issue, as expected, has resonance in urban Punjab where the population is comparatively well-informed, politically motivated, and directly affected on an almost weekly basis by bar association protests.  While the poll contained no questions about the violence in Karachi that had occurred just a few days before pollsters went to the streets, anecdotal evidence from these urban centers strongly suggests  ISLAMABAD 00002572  002 OF 002   that it may have colored the populace,s views on the Chief Justice controversy.  It is important to note that urban Punjab is generally viewed as the center of opposition -- both Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz and Pakistan People,s Party -- support in the province.  Even so, the strong anti-Musharraf sentiment reflected in these polling numbers seems to suggest that the Chief Justice controversy -- and the government,s response to it -- has decreased Musharraf,s support in these areas.  Given the vast differences between urban and rural opinions in Punjab, polling in these urban areas can not/not be used to extrapolate support for Musharraf across the province.   End Comment. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2494", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/8/2007 13:13", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 002574  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/08/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: FEDERAL RAILWAYS MINISTER DEFENDS MEDIA CRACKDOWN  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2494       B. STATE 77589  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) On June 5, PolOff met with Federal Minister of Railways (and unofficial Pakistan Muslim League spokesman) Sheikh Rashid Ahmed to discuss the recent curtailment of media freedom and the current political situation. Ahmed said that press limitations were necessary to ensure national security and to bolster the army's morale during this time of crisis.  2. (C) According to Ahmed, the electronic media was getting \"out of hand\" and exaggerating the Chief Justice case. Such incitement of the public was leading to unrest and violence, he said. Ahmed stressed that unlike print media, whose commentary on current events was more controlled, TV news was sensationalized and biased. He asserted that no one watches the government-run PTV news, and opposition party journalists staff all the independent TV channels. Ahmed emphasized that the purpose of media is to make an informed citizenry, not to promote anti-government sentiments. With live broadcasts, anyone can say anything with no concern as to the effects. Mullahs can incite people to violence or people can denigrate the soldiers sacrificing their lives on Pakistan's borders.  3. (C) Ahmed blamed the \"black coats and black cameras\" (lawyers and media) for overblowing the Chief Justice issue. In his opinion, the court should adjudicate the case and both parties should abide by the decision. He assured PolOff that new media limitations will make political parties lose interest in the political \"show\", and the current restrictions will be lifted after the Chief Justice issue is resolved.  4. (C) The Minister also shared his views on the upcoming elections and stated that a deal with the ruling Pakistan Muslim League was essential for the Pakistan People's Party. \"Benazir needs the army; she can not survive without it,\" he said. Ahmed stressed that Musharraf's remaining in uniform was a sacrifice for the good of the country. (Note: Ahmed's constituency in Rawalpindi includes a military cantonment and many army residences. End note.) He believed that Musharraf was the only person who could lead Pakistan into the future and ensure that the extremists do not gain ground.  5. (S) On June 8, PolOff delivered reftel points to Minister Ahmed. He acknowledged the need for press freedom and promised to pass the points to the highest levels of his government. Ahmed commented that with the June 7 suspension of Musharraf's proposed amendments to the PEMRA ordinance, the electronic media had nothing left to fear. He asserted, however, that it was unacceptable for the print media to spread lies about President Musharraf.  6. (C) Comment. The tall, cigar-chewing Sheikh Rashid Ahmed is a well-known political personality who has served as Information Minister several times in the past. His recent public statements supporting the press crackdown on various media outlets have made him the government's de facto spokesperson on the issue. Many believe this is intentional because he is more forceful than Information Minister Mohammed Ali Durrani in his defense of government actions. There are continuing rumors that he may replace Durrani as the Information Minister. End comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/12/2007 12:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 02 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 002617  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  FOR THE DEPUTY SECRETARY FROM THE CHARGE  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/11/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR THE DEPUTY SECRETARY'S VISIT TO PAKISTAN  *********************** * Missing Section 001 * ***********************   ISLAMABAD 00002617  002 OF 003   6.  (C)  Most of Musharraf's advisors are recommending he either instruct his legal team to stop fighting the multiple procedural motions against the reference and accept defeat graciously or completely withdraw the reference.  Doing so would be tantamount to admitting filing the reference was a mistake -- something difficult for Musharraf to acknowledge publicly.  Nevertheless, few observers believe Musharraf will win the procedural motions.  Musharraf can either lose now and prevent further political damage, or he can lose months from now, after the Supreme Court finishes deliberating the petitions.  MUSHARRAF'S LEGACY  7.  (C)  The political problems of the last two months have distracted both domestic and international audiences from Musharraf's significant accomplishments since 1999.  Your message to him should be that it is not too late to turn attention back to the vision he set for Pakistan when he came to power, but that he must act quickly to put the Chief Justice controversy behind him.  8.  (C)  Musharraf's legacy includes:  --He is the first leader of Pakistan in decades to say \"no\" to extremism and to roll back the Islamization began under Zulfikar ali Bhutto and accelerated through the Zia ul Haq years.  The passage of the Women's Protection Bill in November 2006 was an important indicator that the country is indeed changing direction.  --Thanks in large part to Musharraf's leadership, Pakistan is closer to an agreement with India on territorial and border issues than perhaps ever in its history.  Significantly, Musharraf has brought the Pakistani public along with his proposals on Kashmir and other contentious issues.  --Musharraf has made enormous progress on nuclear material security and security of the nuclear arsenal.  More needs to be done, especially on nuclear material security, but he is the first leader in Pakistan's history to pay adequate attention to these issues.  --Thanks in significant part to sound policies, Pakistan is experiencing an economic boom.  A smaller percentage of the population lives below the poverty line than in decades.  --Since Musharraf came to office, press freedom has blossomed.  The government's attempts to clamp down on the media in early June were sensational in large part because they were so contrary to Musharraf's previous record.  --The opposition political parties, the legal establishment, and a whole range of NGOs, including human rights NGOs, operate relatively freely.  HOW TO PROTECT THIS LEGACY  9.  (C)  Our message to Musharraf and his government continues to be:  --Fighting al Qaeda and countering the Taliban is in the best long-term interests of Pakistan.  --Progress toward democracy must continue unabated and must be visibly apparent to observers.  --Protection of press freedoms and freedom of assembly is centrally important, especially given the current levels of international press scrutiny.  ISLAMABAD 00002617  003 OF 003    --Pakistan must deal robustly with law and order issues, including fighting terrorism and extremism; countering corruption at all levels of government; and effectively combating Pakistan's gun culture.   10.  (C)  We look forward to welcoming you. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/14/2007 5:44", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002647  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, EFIN, KUNR, PGOV, PK, PREL, UNDP SUBJECT: DEMARCHE - PROMOTING TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY AT THE UNDP DELIVERED  REF: STATE: 80349  1. (U) Summary:  Poloff delivered reftel demarche June 13 to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Assistant Director United Nations (III) Syed Mustafa Rabbani, who said the Government of Pakistan \"can,t comment now\" on the reftel points but would consult the GOP,s Permanent Representative to the United Nations and respond within two days. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE77753", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/14/2007 5:44", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002648  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/13/2017 TAGS: MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SHANGHAI COOPERATIVE ORGANIZATION DEMARCHE DELIVERED  REF: STATE 77753  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)   1.  (C) Summary:  Poloff delivered reftel demarche June 12 to Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Assistant Director of the Americas Kamran Mansoor, who stated the Government of Pakistan would consult the appropriate offices and respond within approximately one week. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/14/2007 12:06", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 002654  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  CENTCOM FOR ADMIRAL FALLON  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, AF, IN, PK SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR ADMIRAL FALLON'S JUNE 15-17 VISIT TO PAKISTAN  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) We look forward to your arrival in Pakistan.  As always, your discussions with senior officials will strengthen joint U.S.-Pakistan efforts in the War on Terror. You may also have the opportunity to encourage your military counterparts to support democratization and the protection of human and civil rights.  Doing so will reinforce the messages of Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte and Assistant Secretary of State Boucher, both of whom will be in Islamabad  SIPDIS during your visit.  2.  (C)  You arrive at a time of intense scrutiny of the U.S-Pakistan relationship, both inside Pakistan and in the international community.  The Pakistani press often overlooks positive news about the U.S.-Pakistan relationship and focuses only on perceived U.S. criticism of or distancing from the government.  Given the Pakistani media's tendency to focus only on the negative, we endeavor to be exceptionally careful in our public remarks about our relationship with Pakistan and, especially, about Pakistan's contributions to the War on Terror.  On issues of democracy and civil rights, however, we believe a more forthright public approach is important at this time.  In private, candidly expressing our concerns on both counter-terrorism issues and progress on democratization is both necessary and appropriate.  SECURITY ISSUES  3.  (S) The security situation in the Northwest continues to deteriorate.  Taliban militants, as well as what appear to be criminals calling themselves Taliban, routinely stage attacks, kidnappings, and violent robberies within FATA and in the neighboring settled areas.  Newspapers in Peshawar often report death threats against video and music shop owners as evidence of increased talibanization in FATA and Northwest Frontier Province.  Each unsolved murder, bomb blast and threat to local businesses highlights the increasing difficulty of law enforcement to maintain or regain law and order in FATA and surrounding areas.  UPDATE ON MAY 14 INCIDENT  4.  (C) During a June 13 meeting, Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan Saleem Hayat told Assistant Secretary of State Boucher that Pakistan had completed its investigation into the May 14 killing of a U.S. Army officer by a Frontier Corps troop. He said the Pakistan Military was convinced the incident was the result of a lone disgruntled soldier and did not indicate a broader problem. He promised to present a copy of the report to MG Helmley.  THE CHIEF JUSTICE CONTROVERSY  5.  (C)  On March 9, President Musharraf called the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court to his office in the Rawalpindi Garrison, presented a reference (charge sheet) against him, and demanded he resign from office in return for what reportedly was a substantial golden handshake, possibly including an ambassadorship in Europe.  The Chief Justice refused and hired a formidable legal team to fight the reference in the Supreme Court.  (Note:  Musharraf's motives for attempting to oust the Justice remain unclear.  The charge sheet involves minor corruption that is still widely practiced in Pakistan.  The generally accepted -- though never fully verified -- true motives may have been that Musharraf or someone around him was unnerved by the judicial activism and independence of the Justice.  End Note.)   ISLAMABAD 00002654  002 OF 003   6.  (C)  Since March 9, the national bar association, which is the core of civil society in Pakistan, has effectively kept the Chief Justice on the front pages of local newspapers by holding regular anti-Musharraf demonstrations around the country.  The government's attempts in early June to clamp down on press freedom were intended to prevent coverage of those demonstrations.  The government (and some observers) believed the press was exaggerating the size of rallies and crossing the line from journalism into political activism. That said, most of Musharraf's advisors privately opposed the press crackdown.  7.  (C)  Musharraf's advisors tell us that he has found the last two months stressful and that the tension has negatively impacted his usually strong political instincts.  Advisors cite Musharraf's reactions to the May 12 political violence in Karachi, which took over 45 lives, as both an example of his damaged political touch and of the moment when his political fortunes took a particularly negative turn.  Had he apologized to the families of the victims and promised a full investigation into the violence, he likely would have suffered minimal harm that day.  Instead, he blamed the deaths on the Chief Justice, a ploy that backfired and caused some of his own party leaders to begin back briefing against his recent decisions.  8.  (C)  Most of Musharraf's advisors are recommending he either instruct his legal team to stop fighting the multiple procedural motions against the reference and accept defeat graciously or completely withdraw the reference.  Doing so would be tantamount to admitting filing the reference was a mistake -- something difficult for Musharraf to acknowledge publicly.  Nevertheless, few observers believe Musharraf will win the procedural motions.  Musharraf can either lose now and prevent further political damage, or he can lose months from now, after the Supreme Court finishes deliberating the petitions.  MUSHARRAF'S LEGACY  9.  (C)  The political problems of the last two months have distracted both domestic and international audiences from Musharraf's significant accomplishments since 1999.  Our message to him is that it is not too late to turn attention back to the vision he set for Pakistan when he came to power, but that he must act quickly to put the Chief Justice controversy behind him.  10.  (C)  Musharraf's legacy includes:  --He is the first leader of Pakistan in decades to say \"no\" to extremism and to roll back the Islamization began under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and accelerated through the Zia ul Haq years.  The passage of the Women's Protection Bill in November 2006 was an important indicator that the country is indeed changing direction.  --Thanks in large part to Musharraf's leadership, Pakistan is closer to an agreement with India on territorial and border issues than perhaps ever in its history.  Significantly, Musharraf has brought the Pakistani public along with his proposals on Kashmir and other contentious issues.  --Musharraf has made enormous progress on nuclear material security and security of the nuclear arsenal.  More needs to be done, especially on nuclear material security, but he is the first leader in Pakistan's history to pay adequate attention to these issues.   ISLAMABAD 00002654  003 OF 003   --Thanks in significant part to sound policies, Pakistan is experiencing an economic boom.  A smaller percentage of the population lives below the poverty line than in decades.  --Since Musharraf came to office, press freedom has blossomed.  The government's attempts to clamp down on the media in early June were sensational in large part because they were so contrary to Musharraf's previous record.  --The opposition political parties, the legal establishment, and a whole range of NGOs, including human rights NGOs, operate relatively freely.  HOW TO PROTECT THIS LEGACY  11.  (C)  Our message to Musharraf and his government continues to be:  --Fighting al Qaeda and countering the Taliban is in the best long-term interests of Pakistan.  --Progress toward democracy must continue unabated and must be visibly apparent to observers.  --Protection of press freedoms and freedom of assembly is centrally important, especially given the current levels of international press scrutiny.  --Pakistan must deal robustly with law and order issues, including fighting terrorism and extremism; countering corruption at all levels of government; and effectively combating Pakistan's gun culture.   12.  (C)  We look forward to welcoming you. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2033", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/18/2007 13:22", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002699  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: CHIEF JUSTICE CASE:  SUPREME COURT DEFERS RULING ON PROCEDURAL POINTS; OPENING STATEMENTS BEGIN  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2033       B. ISLAMABAD 1834      C. ISLAMABAD 1783  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1.  BACKGROUND:  In early March, President Musharraf presented a reference (charge sheet) to the Chief Justice of Pakistan.  The same day, the President ordered the establishment of a \"Supreme Judicial Council\" to decide the merits of the reference against the Chief Justice and declared the judge \"non-functioning\" pending the Supreme Judicial Council's final decision. In late April, the Supreme Court of Pakistan agreed to hear arguments on a variety of petitions concerning the Chief Justice's case and the constitutionality of convening the Supreme Judicial Council. On May 7, the Supreme Court ordered the Supreme Judicial Council to suspend proceedings on the Chief Justice's case while the Court decided the various related petitions.  2.  (C)  Since mid-May, the Supreme Court has heard arguments over a number of procedural issues related to the petitions before it.  On June 11, the Court announced it would defer decisions on the procedural motions for an unspecified period.  The Court ordered counsel to begin their opening arguments.  3.( C)  Note:  Even with the Supreme Court case moving on to the next phase, the specific reference (charge sheet) against the Justice is not yet at issue.  The Supreme Court is deciding whether or not the Supreme Judicial Council is constitutionally authorized to sit in judgment over the Chief Justice and whether some members of the originally configured Council should recuse themselves because of conflicts of interest.  End Note.  4.  (C)  UPDATE:  On June 12, PolOff visited the Supreme Court to hear Aitzaz Ahsan, the Chief Justice's lead attorney, present his opening arguments.   Ranking Justice Ramday appeared tense and nervous. He told the packed courtroom that he and his colleagues were working under enormous pressure.  Ramday said that every judge on the panel had discussed recusing himself because of the immense political and public pressure upon the court.  After noting he was considering completely banning the press from reporting on the hearings, Justice Ramday announced journalists could report freely on what counsel said in court, but he placed a gag order on reporting the remarks from the bench.  5.  (C)  Comment:   The Chief Justice case is increasingly complex and legalistic in nature, making it difficult for most Pakistanis to follow the specific arguments. Nevertheless, decent sized crowds continue to turn out for the Chief Justice as he tours around the country -- perhaps ten thousand in Faislabad on June 16, according to Consulate Lahore -- and the Chief Justice's lead attorney, Aitzaz Ahsan, is not lacking for face time on local news networks.  6.  (C)  Comment cont'd:  At this point, unless the government finds a way to accept defeat early and end the court proceedings, the future holds three possibilities, barring unforeseen developments: --  The Supreme Court rules that the President mishandled the initial reference and should not have suspended the Chief Justice.  The Chief Justice would return to the bench. --  The Supreme Court dismisses the case on procedural grounds.  The Chief Justice would return to the bench. --  The Supreme Court rules for the government and orders the Supreme Judicial Council, perhaps with new members, to begin hearings on the reference.  The outcome of those hearings, which could last for months, would decide the Chief Justice's  ISLAMABAD 00002699  002 OF 002   fate. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/22/2007 11:22", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 002780  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PHUM, ECON, PK, AF, IN SUBJECT: BOUCHER,S FOREIGN MINISTRY DISCUSSIONS FOCUS ON CURRENT EVENTS, STRATEGIC DIALOGUE AND THE NEIGHBORHOOD   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  On June 15, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher met separately with Foreign Minister Kasuri, Foreign Secretary Khan, Additional Secretary for the Americas Shahid Kamal, and other Ministry  SIPDIS officials.  The discussions focused on the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue and relations with Afghanistan and India. On the Strategic Dialogue, Pakistani officials noted progress on the energy, education, and science and technology pillars, but believe there is still some work to do establishing the economic pillar. On Pak-Afghan relations, they reported signs of progress despite interpersonal tensions at the top. On Pakistan,s relations with India, the various Pakistani officials showed cautious optimism.  Finally, in discussing current domestic events in Pakistan, Kasuri stated the Government of Pakistan would support the Supreme Court,s ruling in the reference against the Chief Justice and would remain committed to freedom of the press.  End Summary.  Kasuri,s thoughts on the Chief Justice --------------------------------------  2.  (C) Kasuri stated the Government of Pakistan would support the Supreme Court,s ruling on the reference against Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry.  He conveyed complaints Post has heard from several other government officials:  a) the Chief Justice was &promoting8 himself by feeding on the media,s close attention to his case; b) the Chief Justice,s newfound popularity was eroding the separation of power between the judicial and executive branches; and c) the decision to file the reference against the Chief Justice had been made in part because the government was concerned over the Chief Justice,s role in canceling privatization plans, including one for Pakistan Steel.  An independent media --------------------  3.  (C) Kasuri was pleased Musharraf had withdrawn proposed amendments to the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority ordinance that would have placed restrictions on press freedoms.  According to Kasuri, when Musharraf realized the restrictions would tarnish his legacy of promoting free expression, he asked the Prime Minister to announce withdrawal of the amendments.  Kasuri said the government was frustrated by &irresponsible8 news reporting of the Chief Justice,s case and related protests, but understood the media needed to be given time to develop independent regulatory mechanisms.  Strategic Dialogue ------------------  4.  (C) During a lunch with several Ministry officials, Boucher and Additional Secretary Shahid Kamal agreed that, although a formal round of the Strategic Dialogue had not been held for several months, the two countries had maintained ongoing strategic discussions thanks to frequent high-level visits from both sides.  The two officials reviewed progress on the four pillars of the Dialogue (education; science and technology; energy; and economics) and agreed to explore how to invigorate the economic pillar, hopefully holding a round of the dialogue in October or November.  Boucher promised he would work with the appropriate officials in Washington to set a date in that timeframe.  Kamal said Pakistan looked forward to accepting a  ISLAMABAD 00002780  002 OF 003   delegation of U.S. university presidents as part of the education pillar, and both officials noted particular progress in science and technology and energy discussions.  Pakistan on the Hill --------------------  5.  (C) Kamal reiterated Pakistan,s concern over language in House Resolution 1 (the 9/11 bill) that called for certification of Pakistan,s efforts in the War on Terror. Boucher assured Kamal the U.S. Administration continued to emphasize to Congress the negative impact such legislation would have on the U.S.-Pakistan relationship.  Boucher noted the good work Ambassador Durrani was doing, stressed the importance of continuing discussions between members of Congress and visiting Pakistani officials and also noted positive feedback from the visit of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Ehsan ul Haq.  6.  (C) Kamal was pleased the U.S. Congress recently approved USD 110 million for development in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  He also asked for an update on potential legislation authorizing the establishment of Reconstruction Opportunity Zones on the Northwest Frontier Province border with Tribal Areas; he said Pakistani officials recently spoke to European public and private figures about investment opportunities should the Zones be approved.  Boucher assured Kamal the legislation remained a top priority of the U.S. Administration.  Tribal Areas and Afghanistan ----------------------------  7.  (C) Turning to the border areas and Afghanistan, Additional Secretary for Afghanistan Khalid Khattak noted positive trends in the Pak-Afghan relationship.  While Presidents Musharraf and Karzai did not necessarily enjoy a warm relationship, they had met in Ankara in late April and agreed to a substantive joint statement that included follow-up steps. Both leaders, Khattak said, appreciated the importance of a stronger government-to-government relationship.  (Note:  Foreign Secretary Khan told Boucher he would meet his Afghan counterpart in Ankara the first week of July ) it would be the first follow-up meeting to the April 30 trilateral.  End Note.)  8.  (C) According to both Foreign Secretary Khan and Khattak, some of the recent exchanges of gunfire between Pak and Afghan forces on the border had occurred because the two sides were working from different maps, which made it unclear whether some border posts were in Pakistan or Afghanistan. Pakistani and Afghan leaders were open, Khattak said, to resolving these minor border disputes at the field commander level instead of engaging in a public (and politically sensitive) discussion on formally demarcating the border. Khattak added the two countries, economic commissions hoped to meet in July.  &All of this is practical,8 Khattak said, &and practical talk between our peoples is good.8  9.  (C) Turning to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Khattak believed strongly that increased economic opportunities would help defeat militancy and extremism. According to Khattak, tribes in North and South Waziristan agencies had not yet embraced the idea of small businesses; in other areas such as Khyber and Orakzai, small businesses had flourished starting in the 1950s and 60s, which helped explain why these agencies were relatively more peaceful.  ISLAMABAD 00002780  003 OF 003    Composite Dialogue in &slow mode8 ---------------------------------  10.  (C) According to Khan, the Pak-India Composite Dialogue was in &slow mode.8  Khan said April talks on Siachen Glacier were &disappointing;8 he believed Indian officials at the talks did not have a mandate to negotiate and were instructed instead to restate old positions.  In May, the two sides exchanged Sir Creek maps.  Hydrologists and surveyors were narrowing remaining differences.  Khan believed policy suggestions on Sir Creek made at the technical level would be raised to the political level for further negotiation.  While the Sir Creek dispute did not resonate strongly with the public, Khan believed its resolution would help debunk the Pakistani public,s notion that it was impossible to resolve difficult disputes with India.  Khan considered Kashmir &a long way8 from resolution; he stressed Pakistan,s leadership saw no way forward with India but peace through dialogue. Kashmir would remain part of on-going strategic discussions between the two countries, leaders.  11.  (C) According to Khan, the initial Anti-Terror Mechanism meeting in March did not result in productive intelligence sharing.  He was pleased, however, that India had started focusing ) both in public and in private ) on how to address domestic sources of extremism and terrorism.  Regional Integration ) Almaty to Karachi ----------------------------------------  12.  (C) Boucher and Khan discussed prospects for regional economic integration.  Boucher emphasized Pakistan would act as a critical link between Central Asian energy and goods and Indian markets; he added that a highway from Almaty to Karachi could reopen natural trade routes.  Khan agreed and stated the economic potential of integration with Central Asian economies made security in Afghanistan all the more important to Pakistan,s long-term stability and prosperity. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/22/2007 11:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 002782  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PGOV, PK, AF SUBJECT: BOUCHER VISITS BALOCHISTAN  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On June 14, Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher made his first visit to Balochistan. Inspector General of Police Tariq Khosa discussed the need for more contacts with his counterparts in Afghanistan and Iran and expressed doubt that Afghan refugees would want to return home any time soon. Members of Balochistan's Provincial Assembly complained that their resolutions are frequently ignored by the government and said that the chances of free and fair elections in Balochistan were very poor. Chief Minister Jam Muhammad Yousaf provided an exceptionally rosy picture of the province, which was in marked contrast to the observations of provincial assembly members.  2. (U) Boucher also visited a Police Training Center and a voters' list display center in Quetta as well as the Chaman border crossing and an International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Bureau-funded Frontier Corps Outpost at Spina Tiza. Pishin District Frontier Corps Commandant Colonel Massud emphasized the importance of cross-border cooperation with the Afghan government to keep important trade lines open and control illegal crossings. End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- -------------- Increasing Police Writ, Skills and Cross-Border Cooperation --------------------------------------------- --------------  3. (C) On June 14, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher, accompanied by Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde and Senior Advisor Caitlin Hayden, made his first trip to Balochistan. He began meetings in Quetta with the new Inspector General of Police Tariq Khosa. Khosa discussed the measures he had taken to increase security in the province, such as boosting the numbers of police constables and increasing the anti-terror force. Khosa was optimistic that the conversion of 29 of the province's &B8 areas (tribal areas with no government writ) to &A8 areas (where there is a recognized police and government presence) will be complete by the end of the year.  He insisted that there was no insurgency problem in Balochistan and called militant groups' periodic acts of violence &low-level sabotage.8  Khosa stressed that with elections coming up later this year, sub-nationalist groups in Balochistan would not want to be associated with anti-government activity and that now was the time to bring them on board by giving them government jobs.  Khosa added that he had inducted a number of police recruits from the Marri tribe, whose leaders have violently opposed the government.  4. (C) Khosa emphasized more face-to-face contact was needed with his law enforcement counterparts in Afghanistan and Iran to better coordinate security. Khosa complained, for example, that the Balochistan Liberation Army received its funding and instructions from leadership taking shelter in Afghanistan. (Comment: Khosa exuded confidence at the meeting and generally downplayed the serious challenge his police forces face.  He did not mention, for instance, the suicide bomber who detonated himself inside the Quetta District Court complex in February, killing 15 -- an event that rattled even veteran Balochistan observers.  Within hours of the Assistant Secretary's departure, gunmen sprayed a passing van with  SIPDIS bullets and killed seven Army soldiers.  End Comment.)  5. (C) Khosa said that it would be difficult to convince Balochistan's Afghan refugees to return home, since most of  ISLAMABAD 00002782  002 OF 004   them had lived in Pakistan for the last 20 years and many have obtained fake Pakistani national identity cards.  The religious political parties (which rule Balochistan's provincial government in coalition with the Pakistan Muslim League) did not want to address the issue because these Afghans are a vote base, Khosa said. He estimated that there were approximately 350,000 Afghans living illegally in Quetta and said police have deported 500-600 in the past several months.  Khosa was upbeat about security in Jungle Pir Alizai and Girdi Jungle refugee camps, however, and said that Girdi Jungle is no longer a no-go area for police. Frontier Corps ingress/egress monitoring of Jungle Pir Alizai camp has effectively limited access by criminal elements.  6. (C) Khosa closed by saying that while his work was difficult and vitally important, Balochistan, and Pakistan as a whole, would only be stable by employing a &three-pronged strategy of security, education and economic development.8 The most important thing the United States could do, he said, is invest in education. Boucher agreed and stated that the United States invests nearly $100 million a year in Pakistan and would continue to invest in the education sector.  ---------------------------------------- Provincial Assembly Members Ask For Help ----------------------------------------  7. (U) Meeting at the USAID-funded Provincial Assembly Information and Technology Resource Center, provincial assembly members complained that their assembly's resolutions were frequently ignored.  The assembly, had, for example, rejected the government's plans for increasing the number of military cantonments in the province; converting \"B\" law enforcement areas to \"A\" areas; developing Gwadar port; and building the India-Pakistan-Iran pipeline. Nevertheless, all of these projects were moving forward.  One member said that Balochis had no control over their province's own resources. They worried outsiders coming to the province would eventually outnumber the Baloch themselves, which was why control of Gwadar port should be handed over to the province.  8. (U) Members expressed pessimism at the prospect of free and fair elections in Balochistan.  Without an independent election commission or judicial system, credibility was impossible, one member said.  The election commission and intelligence agencies support the ruling party, he continued, and the Commission refuses to meet with opposition political parties.  9. (U) Another member complained that it was difficult for Baloch students to get scholarships to study within Pakistan and even more difficult for them to get visas to study abroad in places like the U.S.  The Charge replied that the Embassy could start outreach efforts in Balochistan in the form of information briefings for student exchanges and training for the online visa application process.  Another member accused the intelligence agencies of training terrorists in Balochistan.  --------------------------------------------- ------------- On the Other Hand, Chief Minister Assures That All Is Well --------------------------------------------- -------------  10. (C) Balochistan's Chief Minister Jam Muhammad Yousaf (a compromise candidate of the Pakistan Muslim League and Mutahida Majlis-e-Amal coalition government) told Assistant Secretary Boucher that he was happy with Balochistan's  SIPDIS overall security situation. There had also been progress over  ISLAMABAD 00002782  003 OF 004   the last five years in the areas of health, education, water, and devolution, but Yousaf admitted that it was difficult to spread development equitably because of Balochistan's sparse, dispersed population.  11. (C) Yousaf said outside investment had helped Balochistan. He also noted that efforts like Gwadar port development had started under Prime Minister Sharif's regime in the 1990's and had once enjoyed the full support of Balochistan's nationalist political parties.  Although Gwadar Port did not provide many jobs to Balochis, other investments did -- particularly in the mining and marble industries. When asked about the prospects for more equitable revenue sharing between the federal and provincial governments, Yousaf said that the Sui Gas agreement (and the establishment of royalty rates) had been concluded in 1956, when Balochistan led the country in energy production.  The situation had changed, Yousaf said, and other areas were being developed for oil and gas extraction, producing higher royalties for the provinces.  (Note: A frequent complaint from Balochistan's politicians is that Sui's wellhead price is much lower than those in other provinces. End Note.)  12. (C) When asked about the nationalist situation, Yousaf said that 20,000 - 30,000 Balochis had taken shelter in Afghanistan to avoid violence, but that militants like Baloch Marri still crossed the Pak-Afghan border.  To help settle the situation and give displaced people a boost, Yousaf said, he helped to resettle displaced people into Dera Bugti. (Comment: The displaced people Yousaf helped resettle were from a clan locked in a bitter blood feud with deceased tribal leader Nawab Bugti's people. The incomers' presence has increased tension in the area. End Comment.)  13. (C) Yousaf said that accusations of militant activity in Balochistan's religious schools (madrassas) was overstated, and that there was no substance to the allegation that there is a \"Quetta Shura\" of Taliban leaders. \"Mullah Omar is not in Pakistan,\" Yousaf said.  --------------------------------------------- ----------- Frontier Corps Increasing Security on Pak-Afghan Border --------------------------------------------- -----------  14. (C) Pishin District Frontier Corps Commandant Colonel Massud told Boucher that the Frontier Corps needs to change its strategic focus from anti-smuggling to border control to best meet Pakistan's security challenges.  To this end, the Frontier Corps has constructed walls to prevent cross-border movement; installed security lights; established new border posts; and increased border patrols.  Illegal border crossings have increased substantially in the past year -- from a 2006 annual total of 1,719 to 2,511 so far in 2007 alone, he said.  Most of these crossings could be attributed to people's attempts to escape security operations in southern Afghanistan, but Frontier Corps troops have seized a large number of arms, ammunition, and narcotics from smugglers as well.  15. (C) Massud complained that Pakistan was attempting to control movement across the Pak-Afghan border, but Afghan authorities had expressed little interest in providing real support. Afghanistan, for example, rejected Pakistan's request to install biometric scanners at the Chaman border crossing, and the number of Pakistan border posts dwarfed their Afghan counterparts.  16. (C) Cross-border trade was a vital link for people living  ISLAMABAD 00002782  004 OF 004   in and around Chaman, Massud said, and there was a large market that lay just inside the Afghan border.  On average, over 8,000 Pakistani nationals cross the Chaman border into Afghanistan daily, but the Afghan government had just decreed that small vehicles and motorcycles would not be permitted to cross into Afghanistan for security reasons.  This arbitrary rule, he said, would create problems for Chaman's residents.  ----------------------------- Site Visits Show Ground Truth -----------------------------  17. (U) Assistant Secretary Boucher's visit to Balochistan included three other stops:  -- Boucher's visit to a police training center in Quetta coincided with a basic investigation skills class provided by U.S. law enforcement trainers. Trainees were learning how to take fingerprints.  -- At a draft voter roll display center in Quetta, Boucher learned that only three voters had visited the center to check their names over the last two days. (Note: Pakistan's Election Commission had just started a 21-day display period of the new draft voter rolls to allow voters to confirm their names are on the list and, if not, provide a chance to register. Political parties and other observers have expressed alarm at the low number of voters registered (approximately 50 million) compared to old voters' list (approximately 70 million) and the estimated number of eligible voters (82-86 million). Even the Election Commissioner has admitted that at least 10 million more voters need to be registered to make the next general elections credible; however, this is unlikely to happen during the display period. End Note.)  -- Boucher also visited two sites controlled by the Frontier Corps: the busy Chaman Border crossing and a remote border outpost in the barren, ridged landscape of Spina Tiza, built with International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Bureau funds. At both sites, Frontier Corps officers were proud to discuss their recent successes in controlling the Pak-Afghan border and were interested in working with the U.S. to bolster their capabilities. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2220", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/22/2007 13:10", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002793  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PGOV, PK, AF SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF ASSURES NEGROPONTE THAT FIGHT AGAINST TERROR, EXTREMISM ARE TOP PRIORITIES  REF: ISLAMABAD 2220  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  ------- Summary -------  1. (C) During a 90-minute cordial meeting with Deputy Secretary Negroponte, Assistant Secretary for South and  SIPDIS Central Asian Affairs Boucher, and the Charge d'Affaires, President Musharraf emphasized that Al Qaeda and extremism are Pakistan's greatest threat.  The National Security Council is working on a military, political, and development strategy to go after Al Qaeda and the Taliban. End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ----------- Securing the Pak-Afghan Border and Eliminating Extremism --------------------------------------------- -----------  2. (S-NF) Musharraf said that Pakistan's Al Qaeda network consists mostly of Uzbeks and Arabs concentrated in North and South Waziristan, mostly in Mir Ali and Bajaur Agency.  The National Security Council has tasked the Vice Chief of Army Staff to head a military task force to draw up a battle plan to deal with them over the next few weeks.  Musharraf admitted that the September 2006 North Waziristan Agreement has not been as successful as he had hoped in curbing cross-border movement and eliminating militants' ability to use the area as a safehaven, but said that it was no reason to abandon it altogether.  For the agreement to succeed, Musharraf said, the government first had to make the parties abide by their commitments.  3. (C) Musharraf stated that Pakistan took its responsibilities for maintaining security along the Pak-Afghan border seriously. Concrete steps to halt cross-border movement and decrease militants' ability to use Pakistani territory as sanctuary include fencing portions of the border, reinforcing border troops, and issuing curfews. Musharraf emphasized, however, that the Taliban's war in Afghanistan is primarily an Afghan issue, so Pakistan should not be blamed for everything that goes wrong in Afghanistan. Even in the Balochistan capital of Quetta, Musharraf said, the security threat consists of Afghan Pashtuns taking shelter in refugee camps. This is one more reason why the refugee camps need to be closed (reftel).  Musharraf asked for U.S. assistance in convincing Afghan President Karzai to hand over Brahamdagh Bugti (grandson and heir apparent of Nawab Bugti, killed by Pak security forces in September 2006) and Baloch Marri (alleged head of the Balochistan Liberation Army).  4. (C) Musharraf expressed his gratitude for U.S. assistance to the Frontier Corps and emphasized the importance of our future support.  Pakistan wholeheartedly supports increasing Frontier Corps capabilities to better protect the Pak-Afghan border, and the government places such a high priority on improving the Frontier Corps that they are dedicating their own budget resources to the effort and are not waiting for U.S. funding to come through.  The government is increasing the number of police in border areas by 15,000; training 27,000 tribal police (levies) and hereditary security forces (khasadars) to improve their skills; re-deploying Frontier Constabulary troops to the border areas; and adding 12 more Frontier Corps wings.  The military will start providing  ISLAMABAD 00002793  002 OF 002   Frontier Corps troops with tanks, vehicles, better weapons, and army-sponsored training, Musharraf said.  5. (S) Musharraf praised the level of U.S.-Pakistan intelligence cooperation.  --------------------- The Development Angle ---------------------  6. (C) To win the fight against extremism, Musharraf said, it is important to work with the local population and include political and development aspects in a larger strategy to change the security environment in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  The spread of extremism into settled areas is a worrisome trend, he said, but ordinary people support the government - they do not like the extremists who are burning down their CD shops and intimidating them.  7. (C) On the development front, Musharraf said that Pakistan is putting 15 billion rupees (approximately 825 million U.S. dollars) into the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. \"We have to move forward,\" Musharraf said, but the military cannot take the lead in implementing aid; they can only play a supporting role. Musharraf also thanked Negroponte for U.S. development assistance.  -------------------------------- For Political Progress, Moderate Forces Should Come Together --------------------------------  8. (C) Musharraf said that moderate forces should come together to triumph over extremism.  He complained, however, that political parties and the national assembly did not want to deal with any real problems.  Instead, he said, he needs to fix problems himself and deal with the political fallout when he is not successful.  Musharraf reiterated the constitutionality of his continuation in uniform and said that both the uniform issue and the upcoming elections would be held in accordance with the constitution.  It would extra-constitutional to be re-elected by new assemblies, Musharraf said, and what is really necessary is a broad base of moderate political support.  Musharraf made no specific commitment about when he would remove his uniform.  9. (C) Musharraf assured Negroponte that he would abide by the Supreme Court's decision on the suspended Chief Justice's petition regarding the unconstitutionality of the presidential reference against him. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/22/2007 13:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002794  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2017 TAGS: MCAP, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: F-16 SECURITY NOTES:  REQUEST FOR TWO SPECIFIC CHANGES THAT WILL BENEFIT COALITION OPERATIONS.  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  Pakistan's September 2006 agreement to purchase 18 new F-16 aircraft marked an important milestone in our alliance.  The agreement signaled Pakistan's and the United States' intent to continue strengthening our security relationship.  We are grateful for both State's and DoD's enormous efforts to facilitate both this sale and the separate transfer of Excess Defense Article F-16s.  SECURITY ISSUES  2.  (C)  For the sake of our own national security, as well as to safeguard the long-term viability of our security assistance relationship with Pakistan, maintaining the security of technology related to F-16s is preeminently important.  We understand and support most of the security notes that accompany the September 2006 Letter of Offer and Acceptance for new F-16s.  That said, we believe two specific provisions of the security notes will harm Pakistan's operational effectiveness and may negatively impact Coalition operations in Afghanistan.  3.  (C)  Paragraph 9 of the security notes place two unusual requirements on Pakistan:  --The F-16 Aircraft, armaments, and related equipment and technical data must be housed on separate pre-designated Pakistan Air Force bases to ensure no unauthorized access. Furthermore, Pakistan may not have non-U.S./non-Pakistan origin aircraft or personnel at any of the bases with these F-16 aircraft and related equipment.  --No foreign units or personnel may be permanently or temporarily assigned at the bases where F-16 aircraft are assigned, parked, maintained, or stored, or while deployed.  4.  (C)  Post understands the importance of ensuring that non-Pakistani, non-U.S. personnel do not have access to restricted U.S. technology.  That said, requiring separate bases for the F-16s does not necessarily further this goal beyond what would be possible using other techniques. Indeed, restricting the access of Pakistani-owned foreign aircraft to F-16 bases does not directly correlate to restricting the access of foreign nationals to those bases. Meanwhile, the above-noted restrictions could cause serious humanitarian, safety, logistical, and operational difficulties for Pakistan.  Not incidentally, the requirement that third countries, including our NATO allies, be denied access to special F-16 bases could impede our own operational effectiveness.  5.  (C)  We note that:  --Pakistan's search and rescue helicopters are primarily of Russian and French origin.  Some of Pakistan's air lift capacity is European-manufactured Casa 235s.  If Pakistan cannot base these aircraft with the F-16s, Pakistani personnel (and U.S. trainers) could be unnecessarily endangered.  At the very least, operational effectiveness would be hurt by lack of access to Casa 235 capabilities.  --Not allowing foreign units or personnel to deploy to F-16 bases would deny non-U.S. Coalition aircraft operating in Afghanistan access to those facilities.  Such a policy would be counterproductive to our interests in the region. Similarly, our Long War needs require Pakistan to be flexible in its deployment capabilities.  Restricting Pakistan's access to its own bases would limit this flexibility, as would denying Pakistan access to Coalition bases outside of Pakistan.   ISLAMABAD 00002794  002 OF 002   --The basing restrictions prevent Pakistan from launching a unified strike package of U.S. and non-U.S. aircraft from a single air base.  As pre-mission briefings are essential to safety and effectiveness, this would be a serious handicap for the Pakistan Air Force.  --Currently, all Pakistan Air Force fighter pilots train employment tactics at a single air base.  Under the F-16 security restrictions, F-16 pilots would be required to train at a separate facility, an expensive and inefficient proposition.  RECOMMENDATIONS  6.  (C)  In light of the potential for paragraph 9 of the current security notes to adversely impact both Pakistan's and the United States' operational effectiveness, we propose that the note be changed so that the F-16s can be stored in \"separate but co-located\" portions of existing air bases. Under such a plan, the U.S. would establish stringent requirements for the foundation and maintenance of \"separate but co-located\" basing facilities for the F-16s.  We believe that, so long as the U.S. ensures adequate attention to detail as we establish requirements for co-located facilities, we could ensure as much security for our technology as at a dedicated air base.  7.  (C)  Other recommendations:  --There should be a waiver process for more of the F-16 security requirements.  Currently, many of the requirements can only be waived or changed by amending the Letter of Offer and Acceptance.  A waiver requiring \"the written permission of the Department of State\" is available for some of the requirements; we believe it would be appropriate for many of the others.  Authorizing such waivers would enable Coalition or third country (NATO ally) access to bases during humanitarian emergencies and other urgent situations.  --The U.S. should begin security training regarding the F-16 program as soon as possible.  The more Pakistani personnel familiar with security requirements at an early date, the better.    BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2546", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/23/2007 5:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002795  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: PGOV, ECON, KCRM, PK, UK SUBJECT: NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OPPOSITION SUBMITS REFERENCE AGAINST PRIME MINISTER  REF: ISLAMABAD 2546  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On June 21, opposition National Assembly members submitted a disqualification reference (complaint) against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz for financial misconduct. The reference comes on the heels of a similar reference against political leader (and former cricket star) Imran Khan, who has taken a very public stand against MQM leader and government partner Altaf Hussain. (Khan, like many Pakistanis, blames the MQM for the outbreak of political violence in Karachi in May.) The reference against the Prime Minister appears to be political retaliation for the reference against Khan, but the nature of the charges in the reference have been fodder for the Pakistani rumor mill for months. End Summary.  ---------------------------------------- Opposition Parliamentarians Allege Prime Minister Unfit to Serve in Parliament ----------------------------------------  2. (U) On June 21, in the midst of annual budget hearings, opposition National Assembly members presented a disqualification reference against Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz. The opposition members asked National Assembly Speaker Chaudhry Amir Hussain to consider the reference in the same light as the one the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM) submitted against Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf leader (and former cricket star) Imran Khan on June 20. (Note: The reference against the former playboy charged that he fathered an illegitimate child. End Note.)  3. (U) The opposition's reference alleges that Aziz \"engineered\" the 2005 Karachi stock exchange crash.  It claims that, after the crash, Aziz's business associates \"enriched themselves at the cost of the public at large through fraud, forgery and manipulation.\"  The reference also cites Aziz's involvement in the attempt to privatize Pakistan Steel Mills, a privatization plan which some believe would have enriched associates of the Prime Minister.  Chief Justice of the Supreme Court Chaudhry eventually blocked the privatization scheme.  4. (C) One opposition member who helped draft the reference told PolOff June 20 that the reference sheet includes the accusation that the Prime Minister holds dual U.S.-Pakistani nationality, contrary to constitutional prohibitions on dual citizenship for senior officials. The member said that the drafters almost included another charge referring to allegations he once \"flirted\" with Secretary Rice during an official meeting.  ---------------------- Leading PML Politician Saw It Coming ----------------------  5. (C) Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General Mushahid Hussain told PolOff June 20 that the National Assembly speaker never should have accepted the original reference against Imran Khan, since it could spark a rash of similar references. \"Everyone in the National Assembly could be accused of something,\" he said. Indeed, some opposition members have vowed to file additional references against members of the ruling coalition, including Pakistan Muslim  ISLAMABAD 00002795  002 OF 002   League Chairman Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, who allegedly took out loans that he did not repay and were subsequently forgiven.  ------- Comment -------  6. (C) The specific charges in the Prime Minister's reference have been the focus of speculation and debate for some months. One prevalent rumor is that the Prime Minister is working against passage of an anti-money laundering bill because he worries his actions during the Karachi Stock Exchange could be further investigated under such legislation.  Other rumors involve his encouraging the suspension of Chief Justice Chaudhry out of anger over the scuttling the steel privatization plan.  Merited or not, though, it is clear the June 21 reference was politically based.  Opposition parties know that Imran Khan's popularity has increased since he began his public crusade against the MQM.  By filing a reference designed to support Khan, the opposition hopes to gain from the current anti-MQM sentiment in much of the country. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/23/2007 5:57", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 002796  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/22/2017 TAGS: AF, MOPS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: BOUCHER AND VICE CHIEF DISCUSS NEW STEPS IN THE TRIBAL AREAS  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde. Reason: 1.4 (b),(d)  1. (C) Summary:  While he demurred from speaking about Pakistan's political situation, Vice Chief of the Army Staff General Ahsan Saleem Hyat was eager to discuss a variety of topics during his June 13 meeting with Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asia Richard Boucher.  Hyat reported that Pakistan had completed its investigation into the May 14 Frontier Corps killing of a U.S. army officer.  Pakistan was convinced the incident was the work of a disgruntled soldier, not part of a broader problem.  He said Pakistan understood the urgency of improving security in Mir Ali and would soon establish checkpoints around the town.  Pakistan was also committed to expelling Arabs from the border areas, but believed the action would be more permanent if it was accomplished with the cooperation of the tribal residents. Hyat seemed genuinely concerned about the rapid spread of Talibanization through the Tribal Areas and the surrounding settled areas.  He reported that the National Security Council had, on June 11, established a new task force to fight Talibanization.  Hyat would be willing to consider having the task force, which he chairs, coordinate development and security efforts in the Tribal Areas.  The General spoke quite forcefully on the importance of Afghanistan's turning over two accused Baloch insurgents currently in Afghanistan.  End Summary.  2. (C) On June 13, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asia Richard Boucher met with Pakistan's Vice Chief of the Army Staff General Ahsan Saleem Hyat in the General's Rawalpindi office. Also present from the Pakistani side were:  Director General for Military Intelligence Major General Nadeem Ijaz Ahmed; Chief of the General Staff Lieutenant General Salahuddin Satti; and Personal Secretary Brigadier General Sajjad Ghani.  Attending the meeting with Mr. Boucher were Charge d'Affairs Peter Bodde, Major General James Helmly of the Office of Defense Representative - Pakistan; Senior Advisor Caitlin Hayden; and A/PolCouns(notetaker).  3. (C) Replying to an opening question from Boucher, General Hyat said he preferred not to speak about politics or about the mood of the military, particularly during the ongoing controversy over the Chief Justice's suspension.  INVESTIGATION INTO KILLING OF U.S. OFFICER  4. (C) Hyat expressed regret over the May 14 Frontier Corps troop shooting of a group of U.S. soldiers during a Pakistan-Afghanistan-U.S. border flag meeting.  The death of one of the American officers was \"most unfortunate\"; Hyat was personally saddened and embarrassed by the episode.  The Pakistan Military had investigated the assailant's personal history, family, and the state of the Frontier Corps generally.  The military was convinced the incident was the result of an individual disgruntled soldier, not part of any kind of trend or broader problem.  Hyat promised to pass a copy of the full report to the International Security Assistance Force and to Major General Helmly.  5. (C) Hyat noted that both the tribal population and the Frontier Corps had condemned the shooting incident.  The event violated the Pashtun code, which demanded protection of and hospitality for visitors.  The Frontier Corps had existed for over 150 years and had maintained a proud record and tradition.  It had paid a disproportionate price in lives and casualties in the War on Terror.  They were good troops who did not in any way support such actions.  6. (C) Hyat said he had phoned International Security Assistance Force Commander General McNeill some time after  ISLAMABAD 00002796  002 OF 005   the incident and offered to work together on standard operating procedures for security issues.  According to Hyat, during that conversation, McNeill told him the U.S. had faith in the integrity of the Pakistanis' investigation.  CROSS BORDER FIGHTING  7. (C) Concerning the May 11 firing incidents between the Pakistan Military and the Afghan National Army near Angor Ada, Hyat claimed that part of the problem was that the residents and soldiers on opposite sides of the border were from rival tribes.  Hyat had traveled to Kabul shortly after the incident to inform the Afghan National Army that Pakistan would place soldiers from a different tribe on the border; he had asked the Afghan army to do the same.  MIR ALI  8. (C) Hyat acknowledged the United States' serious concerns about the security situation inside the town of Mir Ali, North Waziristan.  He reported that the Pakistan Military would soon establish checkpoints around the town.  The army was also examining what additional forces were needed near Mir Ali.  9. (S/NF) Hyat understood the importance of acting quickly against al Qaeda targets.  \"We know the issue is time sensitive,\" he said.  TRIBAL LEADERS VS. FOREIGNERS  10. (C) Hyat stressed the importance of driving Arabs out of the Tribal Areas one way or the other.  That said, if the task was accomplished with the cooperation of the local people, the result would be more permanent.  Hyat said that his government was working with tribal leaders toward the objective of the tribes forcing Arab foreigners to leave the Tribal Areas.  He personally believed considerable arm twisting would be required to make this happen.  The government would find ways to support good leaders who were helpful in the government's goals.  The government was competing against Arabs' ability to spread significant money around, but money was not everything; honor also was important.  Hyat noted that, if conditions for Afghan civilians improved, Pakistan's work with tribal leaders would be easier.  11. (C) Hyat highlighted the need to avoid collateral damage.  Media coverage of such damage complicated the government's tasks, not just in the Tribal Areas, but throughout Pakistan.  BORDER INCURSIONS  12. (C) According to Hyat, the portions of the Pakistan-Afghanistan border opposite Regional Command-South were relatively secure.  He was pleased that Pakistan and Afghanistan had agreed to work together to fight narco-criminals and gun runners operating in Paracha, a town straddling both sides of the border.  13. (C) According to Hyat, McNeill had reported to him an increase in cross-border incursions into Afghanistan at three geographic points, two of which were in the Waziristans. Hyat said that the Pakistan Military had purchased an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle from Germany.  The Pakistan Military hoped it would be beneficial in combating such incursions.  14. (C) Hyat noted that Pakistan's Special Forces required enhanced training to deal with Afghan border issues.   ISLAMABAD 00002796  003 OF 005   TALIBANIZATION  15. (C) Hyat seemed genuinely concerned over the situation in the Tribal Areas and the settled areas around the Tribal Areas.  He cited recent examples of Talibanization in Tank and Bannu as particularly worrisome.  The Frontier Constabulary, which was responsible for patrolling the area separating the Tribal Areas from the settled areas, was recalling units that had been seconded to areas like Karachi; the additional troops would boost security in the Northwest. Additionally, the Pakistan Military was providing equipment, including tanks, Humvees, and artillery, to the Frontier Corps to aid its fight against Taliban and other miscreants inside the Tribal Areas.  Pakistan was immediately raising an additional two wings (about a thousand troops) of Frontier Corpsmen.  Hyat was anticipating some U.S. financial assistance in establishing these new wings.  MORE ON THE FRONTIER CORPS  16. (C) Hyat reported Pakistan was hoping to raise eight new wings of Frontier Corps troops as soon as possible (the two previously mentioned plus six more) with a large proportion of those troops coming from the Waziristans.  (Note: A wing includes about about 675 troops.  End Note.)  Besides needing more personnel, the Frontier Corps needed to enhance its capacity to fight enemies currently better equipped than the Corps.  17. (C) Boucher noted the U.S. had committed to assisting with the transformation of the Frontier Corps, but that our estimate was that the transformation would take three to five years.  Hyat did not necessarily believe it would take that long, and noted that many of the Pakistan Military's training schools were located in the Northwest Frontier Province.  He believed utilizing those already-existing schools and programs could speed the development of Frontier Corps capacity.  PAKISTAN'S GOALS FOR THE TRIBAL AREAS  18. (C) Pakistan must \"bring the tribal people into the 21st century,\" according to Hyat.  In order to do this, tribals would need to receive a larger \"stake\" in the nation of Pakistan.  One part of that \"stake\" would be education.  The tribal people's enormous desire to educate their children contrasted with the dearth of schools, especially quality schools, in the border region. Quality government schools would provide an attractive alternative to madrassahs -- something that would greatly benefit stability and security in the area.  Similarly, the provision of vocational education was central to meeting Pakistan's goals in the Tribal Areas.  CONCERNS ABOUT TALIBANIZATION FUELING NEW GOVERNMENT MEASURES  19. (C) Hyat reported that the National Security Council had, on June 11, decided to form a task force to fight Talibanization in the Tribal Areas and the adjacent settled areas.  Recruiting more Frontier Corps troops was necessary to root out Talibanization, but it would take time to raise such forces.  Meanwhile, the committee was looking for actions that could show an effect within two-three months. He did not provide further details on what those actions might be.  20. (C) Responding to the Charge's question about overall coordination for Tribal Area development and security enhancement, Hyat posited that the new task force, of which he was chair, might be able to fill such a role.  Noting that  ISLAMABAD 00002796  004 OF 005   all military and civilian stakeholders were part of the task force, he promised to consider the possibility of filling a coordination role and then, if appropriate, discussing the idea with the government.  BORDER SECURITY  21. (C) Hyat highlighted that 13-14 thousand vehicles legally crossed the Pakistan-Afghanistan border each day, while over 45,000 people transited at various official border crossings.  Given the large numbers, differentiating between \"good guys and bad guys\" was an enormous challenge.  He had told Afghan National Army General Bismullah Khan that the two armies should jointly develop a border control plan that they could present to their governments.  According to Hyat, both President Musharraf and Northwest Frontier Province Governor Orakzai supported his idea of allowing the militaries to cooperatively develop a proposal to be shared with civilian authorities.  Hyat said he had requested that General McNeill support the Afghan Army in working on its part of the proposal, since the Afghans would need capacity assistance in the project.  22. (C) Assistant Secretary Boucher noted that it seemed border challenges fell into two major categories: those involving the flow of people and vehicles at official border crossings; and those involving criminals and miscreants using foot and donkey paths to cross the border.  The U.S. would be willing to assist Pakistan in dealing with both types of challenges.  He also acknowledged that, particularly in working on the legal crossing points, Afghanistan's cooperation would be important.  TRIPARTITE COMMISSION  23. (C) Hyat noted that Afghan National Army General Bismullah Khan, General McNeill, and himself had met several times in productive meetings.  That said, he believed that the broader Tripartite Commission, which included military representatives, foreign ministry personnel, and other civilians, should meet more often.  He said that commission meetings were essential for working on \"nitty gritty details.\"  INDIA  24. (C) Hyat spoke of how much Pakistan would benefit from peace with India.  He noted that the current stability had enabled Pakistan to redeploy two army brigades from Sialkot and Lahore to the Afghan border.  With permanent peace, Pakistan would benefit both economically and in terms of security.  BALOCHISTAN (AND WANTED BALOCH NATIONALISTS)  25. (C) Both Hyat and Nadeem complained vigorously over what they described as Afghanistan's harboring two Baloch terrorists in Afghanistan.  Hyat said he had told General Khan that such actions could \"eviscerate\" the bilateral relationship.  Nadeem claimed the two men were able to direct terrorist operations from their remote locations.  Hyat stressed that Interpol had issued warrants for the two, and that the evidence against the men was spelled out in the warrants.  He said that Afghanistan's complaints about Pakistan's not doing enough to find terrorist leaders who were trying to hide rang hollow when two wanted terrorists were allowed to live in the open in Afghan cities.  26. (C) Hyat said that Pakistan, especially the army, had \"won over\" most of the tribes of Balochistan by providing economic development.  Life for Balochistan's population had  ISLAMABAD 00002796  005 OF 005   improved more in the last five years than in the previous 50.  He said that the government was negotiating with various tribes and had sponsored local elections as a step toward greater democracy.  Nadeem said the government was converting areas formerly under tribal remit to government authority. Five years ago, only five of 35 districts were under Balochistan police authority. Now, 25 are, with the rest soon to be converted.  This, he said, made life better for the population, as they were no longer subject to the decrees of tribal leaders sometimes interested only in protecting their personal power. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2220", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/23/2007 7:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002797  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: ECON, ENRG, PGOV, PK, PREL, SOCI SUBJECT: FOREIGN SECRETARY DISCUSSES STRATEGIC DIALOGUE AND BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY WITH DEPUTY SECRETARY  REF: ISLAMABAD 2220  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reason 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Deputy Secretary Negroponte, Assistant Secretary Boucher, and Charge d,Affaires Bodde met Foreign  SIPDIS Secretary Khan for a lunch meeting on June 16.  Khan  SIPDIS discussed details of the Strategic Dialogue between the U.S. and Pakistan, expressed concerns about a bilateral investment treaty (BIT), and reported that Pakistan,s relationship with India had improved despite some continuing challenges.  END SUMMARY.  STRATEGIC DIALOGUE  2.  (C) Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asia Affairs Richard Boucher,  SIPDIS and Charge d,Affaires a.i. Peter Bodde discussed U.S.-Pakistan relations with Foreign Secretary Khan during a lunch meeting on June 16.  Khan discussed the four components of U.S.-Pakistan strategic dialogue:  energy, science and technology, education, and economics.  Regarding energy, Pakistan had established two working groups to identify projects suitable for technology, training, and funding cooperation.  On science and technology, Khan asked the U.S. to identify institutions and scientists to work with Pakistan.  In the education component, Khan said Pakistan appreciated U.S. assistance through the Fulbright program. Concerning economics, Khan requested more information on the proposed Reconstruction Opportunity Zones, which Assistant Secretary Boucher promised to provide shortly.  SIPDIS  BIT AND FTA  3.  (C) As he has in the past, Khan argued that a proposed bilateral investment treaty (BIT) should be part of a larger Free Trade Agreement between the two nations.  He raised three concerns about a BIT.  First, he noted Pakistan,s concern that the U.S.-proposed BIT language might lead other nations to demand the same language from Pakistan.  Second, consultations with the U.S. through special regulatory ordinances might lead to premature disclosure of regulatory processes.  Third, the BIT might allow the private sector and business shareholders to sue the Government of Pakistan. Despite those concerns, Khan said Pakistan could accept a BIT as part of a Free Trade Agreement.  The Deputy Secretary said he would not hold out hope for a Free Trade Agreement at this time, but noted the U.S. was eager to further discuss a BIT at the working level.  INDIA  4.  (C) Khan agreed with the Deputy Secretary that relations with India had improved.  Both sides had pursued confidence-building measures and there was progress on Kashmir.  However, the Siachen Glacier and Sir Creek issues remained unresolved.  Preserving the Siachen Glacier should be the top priority of both sides but both armies were damaging it.  Loss of ice, explained Khan, could create significant environmental problems.  5.  (C)  While Sir Creek was still an issue, new maps were helping the nations discuss the problem.  Khan also reviewed India,s and Pakistan,s differences on trade issues.  Khan reported that Pakistan was prepared to negotiate on non-tariff barriers either bilaterally with India or through the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).   The Deputy Secretary's office has reviewed this message.  ISLAMABAD 00002797  002 OF 002   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/23/2007 7:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002798  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: AF, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: DEPUTY SECRETARY AND FOREIGN MINISTER REVIEW STRATEGIC DIALOGUE AND AFGHANISTAN  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reason 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte, Assistant Secretary Boucher, and Charge d,Affaires Bodde met with Foreign Minister Kasuri on June 15.  Both sides expressed strong support for the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue.  Kasuri noted that negative comments from the U.S. media and Congress detracted from a positive relationship. Kasuri said that the energy component of the Strategic Dialogue should include discussions on nuclear energy options for Pakistan.  He also expressed support for economic development in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), noted confidence-building measures with Afghanistan, and shared President Musharraf,s view that a precipitous U.S. withdrawal from Iraq would lead to chaos in the region. END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) During a June 15 meeting, Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte, Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asia Richard Boucher, and Charge d,Affaires a.i. Peter Bodde discussed U.S.-Pakistan relations with Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri.  Kasuri agreed to the Deputy Secretary,s suggestion that the Strategic Dialogue between  SIPDIS the two nations be resumed.  The Deputy Secretary said he could visit Pakistan sometime this fall for the next round of the Dialogue.  3.  (C) Kasuri complained that negative comments from the U.S. media and Congress weakened the bilateral relationship. He said the U.S. press did not highlight the significant cooperation between the nations.  Kasuri had instructed his staff that they should schedule him with the media during his upcoming visit to Washington D.C. in order to counter the negative stories.  4.  (C) Kasuri noted that negative comments were also common in the U.S. Congress.  He said that the language in some legislation showed a suspicion of Pakistan,s actions and motives that was &discouraging and disparaging8 to Pakistan.  Kasuri requested the Administration engage with Congress on this issue.  Kasuri said he would personally meet with Members of Congress during his upcoming visit.  NUCLEAR ENERGY  5.  (C) Noting the proposed nuclear deal between India and the U.S., Kasuri wondered why Pakistan did not have a similar arrangement.  Kasuri cited power shortages in Karachi as an argument that Pakistan needed further nuclear energy capability.  He suggested that an outside group be allowed to establish reactors and maintain control of spent fuel to assuage U.S. proliferation concerns.  The Assistant Secretary assured Kasuri that energy would be a part of the strategic dialogue.  FATA AND AFGHANISTAN  6.  (C) Responding to a question from the Deputy Secretary, Kasuri highlighted the importance of economic development in the FATA.  Political and social development, Kasuri said, cannot succeed until the region develops economically. Kasuri noted Europeans were also looking at economic development plans for FATA and the Northwest Frontier Province.  He added that, geographically and culturally, it was more sensible to compare FATA progress with Afghanistan than the rest of Pakistan.  7.  (C) Kasuri stressed that Pakistanis who want economic and social progress agree that the Taliban should not control Afghanistan.  On refugees, Kasuri asked for help from the international community in repatriating returnees from Pakistan.  The refugee presence in Pakistan caused instability, said Kasuri, whereas they could help the Afghan economy if they returned.  As in his earlier conversation  ISLAMABAD 00002798  002 OF 002   with the Assistant Secretary (reftel), Kasuri said that Pakistan supported the cross-border jirga with Afghanistan because the meeting could lead to increased cooperation, but said that no third party should be included.  IRAQ  8.  (C) Kasuri asked the Deputy Secretary his opinion on the state of Iraq.  According to Kasuri, President Musharraf agreed that a precipitous U.S. withdrawal would lead to chaos in the region.  He stressed, though, that the status quo should not become comfortable for Iraqi leaders; they should be forced to meet benchmarks.  The Deputy Secretary has reviewed this message. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/23/2007 7:25", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002799  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER, SNAR SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER STRESSES NEED FOR STABLE AFGHANISTAN DURING MEETING WITH DEPUTY SECRETARY  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, Reason 1.4 (G)  1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Deputy Secretary Negroponte, Assistant Secretary Boucher, and Charge d,Affaires Bodde met with  SIPDIS Prime Minister (PM) Aziz on June 16.  The PM stressed the importance of a stable Afghanistan and expressed concern about Afghan drug production.  He reiterated Pakistan,s commitment to fighting terrorism and said that Afghanistan was hiding terrorists wanted by Pakistan.  The PM also said he would like the Strategic Dialogue between Pakistan and the U.S. to be more action oriented and hoped that a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) could be settled in the context of a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the U.S.  He discussed Iran,s role in the Middle East and shared his thoughts on domestic politics.  END SUMMARY.  AFGANISTAN AND TERRORISM  2.  (C) During a June 16 meeting with Deputy Secretary John Negroponte, Assistant Secretary for South and Central Asia Richard Boucher, and Charge d,Affaires i.a. Peter Bodde, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz stressed the importance of a stable Afghanistan.   Because of their long porous border, Afghanistan was the most important country for Pakistan.  The PM said his biggest concern was Afghan drug production. There was a strong link between drug money and international terrorism and issues of terrorism and security could not be resolved until drug production was addressed.  Both the U.S. and the European Union could and should do more to tackle the problem.  3.  (C) The PM noted positive developments between the nations.  He reported that, during his recent visit, Kabul had looked improved.  He agreed with President Karzai that Afghan refugees should be gradually returned to Afghanistan. The PM noted the refugee camps operated as safe havens for terrorists and caused security problems for both nations.  In hindsight, the PM said, letting the refugees integrate into Pakistani society may have been a mistake.  4.  (C) Aziz reported the jirga process with Afghanistan was going well.  It was important to support Karzai in this regard.  However, he echoed other government statements that Pakistan did not want a third party involved in the jirga.  5.  (C) A stable Afghanistan, the PM noted, would help keep terrorists out of Pakistan.  Pakistan &would never knowingly allow8 terrorists on its soil and Pakistan could not allow itself to be a safehaven for terrorists plotting against the rest of the world.  The PM and Pakistan as a country had been the victims of terrorist attacks and Pakistan would go after terrorists &with a vengeance.8  He also noted, though, that the Afghan border was porous, the refugee situation exacerbated the terrorism problem, and there sometimes was local support for militants.  The PM also highlighted that Afghanistan was holding terrorists wanted by Pakistan.  The PM had discussed the issue of wanted Baloch militants hiding in Afghanistan with President Karzai, reminding the President that the problem exacerbated the trust deficit between the two countries.  STRATEGIC DIALOGUE  6.  (C) The PM was pleased the Deputy Secretary would lead the next round of the Strategic Dialogue.  The Dialogue should be results oriented, not just a photo opportunity. Both countries were responsible for making the dialogue fruitful.  While eschewing details, the PM also hoped the dialogue would settle a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) in the context of a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the countries (reftel).  IRAN AND THE MIDDLE EAST  7.  (S) The PM raised Iran and the Middle East.  He agreed  ISLAMABAD 00002799  002 OF 002   Iran was acting aggressively against the U.S. and said it appeared Iranian policy was to create problems for the U.S. any way it could.  He claimed Pakistan had evidence Iran was trying to foment controversy over the Danish cartoon issue in Pakistan before President Bush,s March 2006 visit.  As soon as President Bush left the country, Iran stopped its efforts and the controversy subsided, according to Aziz.  8.  (S) Despite such evidence, Pakistan had to engage Iran because of their shared border and Iran,s ability to cause trouble.  Aziz noted that Pakistan already received electricity and gas from Iran.  He hoped negotiations with Iran for a gas pipeline would be successful.  Aziz reported that negotiations were difficult because Iran &was not rational8 and has a complicated political decision-making process.  PAKISTAN DOMESTIC POLITICS  9.  (C) The PM shared his thoughts on Pakistan,s domestic politics.  --Bringing a reference against the Chief Justice was a difficult decision and a sad day for Pakistan.  Because of clear issues of integrity, quality of judgments, and the overstepping of judicial authority, President Musharraf and the PM decided to go forward with the reference.  While they did not predict the lawyers, reaction properly, the issue would pass in time after the Supreme Court gave its judgment.  --Karachi,s May 12 violence created anxiety throughout the country.  Opposition parties were trying to politicize the issue for their advantage.  --The recent budget would help the people and economy of Pakistan and could be termed an election-year budget.  --Elections would likely occur between September 15 and October 15.  Pakistan has always welcomed election observers, the best of whom would be the Pakistani press.  --President Musharraf says he will abide by the Constitution and the Constitution states he can keep both his military and political offices until the end of the year.  --Religio-political parties are not a significant issue. Rather, the real problem is those extremist groups who believe in violence rather than the ballot box.  --Pakistan cannot allow the Talibanization of its society. Military action alone will not suffice.  Economic, religious, cultural, and social issues must be addressed.  The Deputy Secretary's office has reviewed this message. BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE55791|07STATE86316", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/26/2007 5:14", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002817  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ABLD, ASEC, ASIG, PK, SNAR SUBJECT: OIG REPORT ITEM TWENTY ONE UPDATE  REF: A. 07 STATE 86316      B. 07 STATE 55791  1. (SBU) Post provides the following update on recommendation 21:  2. (SBU) Islamabad's Narcotics Affairs Section performed a technical evaluation of proposals for the design/build contract of a new secure compound in Quetta. Of six proposals recieved, two were found to be technically acceptable and two conditionally acceptable.  However, the contract has not been awarded, because the Government of Pakistan has not approved the originally designated construction site.  3. (SBU) A new construction site has been identified in the same area.  Post is awaiting written authorization from the Ministry of Interior.  Once the authorization is received, the regional procurement support office will allow the original bidders 3 weeks to amend their proposals, if necessary.  We hope this process will be completed and the design/build contract awarded in August 2007. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE55791|07STATE86316", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/26/2007 5:14", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002818  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ABLD, ASEC, ASIG, PK, SNAR SUBJECT: OIG REPORT ITEM TWENTY ONE UPDATE  REF: A. 07 STATE 86316      B. 07 STATE 55791  1. (SBU) Post provides the following update on recommendation 21:  2. (SBU) Islamabad's Narcotics Affairs Section performed a technical evaluation of proposals for the design/build contract of a new secure compound in Quetta. Of six proposals recieved, two were found to be technically acceptable and two conditionally acceptable.  However, the contract has not been awarded, because the Government of Pakistan has not approved the originally designated construction site.  3. (SBU) A new construction site has been identified in the same area.  Post is awaiting written authorization from the Ministry of Interior.  Once the authorization is received, the regional procurement support office will allow the original bidders 3 weeks to amend their proposals, if necessary.  We hope this process will be completed and the design/build contract awarded in August 2007. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2468", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/26/2007 8:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002829  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/21/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: THE RED MOSQUE STRIKES AGAIN: MASSAGE PARLORS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2468       B. ISLAMABAD 2334      C. ISLAMABAD 2270      D. ISLAMABAD 1846      E. ISLAMABAD 1688      F. ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), ( d)  1. (C) Summary: On June 23, students from men's and women's madrassahs associated with the Red Mosque kidnapped nine individuals, including six Chinese nationals, from a local massage parlor. The hostages were released sixteen hours later. The incident has embarrassed the Interior Minister, who on June 24 began an official visit to China.  End Summary.  2. (C) In the middle of the night on June 23, students from the men's and women's madrassahs affiliated with the Red Mosque kidnapped nine persons, including six Chinese nationals, from a well-known Islambad brothel fronting as a Chinese accupuncture clinic and massage parlor.  The six Chinese included five women and reportedly some Pakistani customers. As during an incident in early March, when women from the madrassah kidnapped a number of prostitutes from another well known brothel, the Red Mosque claimed it acted against the brothel after neighbors complained about the facility.  3. (C)  Embassy contacts report that the weekend's activities embarrassed the Interior Minister, who departed June 24 for a five day official visit to China. The embarrassment seems to have spurred a quick resolution; the hostages were released after 16 hours -- faster than after previous incidents.  At a press conference after the release, Red Mosque leader Maulana Abdul Rashid Ghazi said that the students had freed the individuals in view of the friendly ties between Pakistan and China and because of government assurances that all brothels would be shut down. Maulana Ghazi warned the local administration that the Red Mosque could take similar action against other massage centers being used as brothels.  4.(C) COMMENT: Most Muslim leaders in Pakistan continue to publicly deplore the Red Mosque's actions.  Nevertheless, the lack of police action against brothels, even after neighbors complain vociferously, leaves a vacuum into which some religious extremists are prone to walk.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07KABUL2005", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/26/2007 14:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002835  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AF SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S PARTICIPATION IN PEACE JIRGA  REF: KABUL 2005  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde for reasons 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C) In response to reftel, PolOff spoke June 25 with Minister of Tourism and Culture GG Jamal, one of five members of the Pakistan jirga commission.  Jamal reported that the two commissions had not discussed the duration of the upcoming jirga.  Under jirga tradition, he said, such a conversation would be inappropriate, as only the full jirga can decide such questions.  That said, the Pakistani commissioners are mindful of what could happen once 700 participants are given free access to a microphone.  The commission is encouraging participants from this side of the border to choose designated spokesmen on various issues so that people do not make the same statements over and over.  2.  (C)  According to Jamal, the working plan is for the jirga to agree upon a set of issues to be pursued by a binational working committee, which then will meet regularly to develop suggested outcomes.  Once the committee finishes its task, the jirga will reconvene to discuss the proposal.  3.  (C)  Reftel reports that Karzai is claiming that Pakistan will not include leaders from the Awami National Party, the Pakhtoon Milli Party, or the coalition of religious parties. Jamal has assured us that all parties are represented on the list the commission presented to President Musharraf for approval.  Indeed, the draft list includes all the ardent Pashtun nationalists reftel states Karzai would like to attend the jirga (Asfandyar Wali Khan, Afriasiab Khattak, and Mahmoud Khan Achekzai).  That said, Jamal could not guarantee the President would approve all three.  (Comment:  Karzai's interventions on this issue are most unhelpful and serve only to fuel Pakistani fears that the jirga will discuss Durand Line issues or Pashtun independence.  We understand that President Musharraf was so upset by Karzai's invitation to Awami National Party Leader Asfandyar Wali Khan to participate in the jirga as a guest of Afghanistan that Musharraf raised the invitation letter with Secretary Rice. End Comment.)  4.  (C)  Also on the draft participant list is the Leader of the Opposition, Maulana Fazl-ur Rehman (head of JUI-F), a vocal and strident critic of the U.S. presence in Afghanistan. Reftel states that Karzai believes Fazl should be a jirga member.  We cannot predict where President Musharraf will come down on this question.  5. (C)  Comment:  It appears the fault lines of the last six months continue.  The Pakistani commissioners want a jirga in the tradition of Pashtun Wali:  egalitarian, inclusive, and male.  Many of our Pashtun contacts complain to us that the Afghan side seems to expecting something closer to a conference than a traditional jirga.  Jamal has warned us from the beginning that, regardless of what Karzai thinks, it is impossible to script a true jirga.  People will say what they want to say.  That said, he and the Interior Minister are committed to making this jirga a success and to working toward peace in the Pashtun area.  We are convinced they understand the importance we place on a successful jirga. More importantly, they understand that President Karzai needs a positive outcome for his own political reasons; commissioners tell us they are motivated by that fact more than any other.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE87370", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/28/2007 10:28", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002853  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/28/2017 TAGS: PK, AF, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: PAKISTAN TO PARTICIPATE IN JULY 2-3 AFGHAN RULE OF LAW CONFERENCE IN ROME  REF: STATE 87370  Classified By: Polcouns Candace Putnam, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) On June 28, PolOff delivered reftel points to Amir Shaukat, Director for Afghanistan at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Shaukat told PolOff the Government of Pakistan would participate in the July 2-3 Afghan Rule of Law Conference in Rome.  Shaukat said Interior Minister Sherpao would \"very likely\" participate, but that his attendance could not be confirmed until he returned from China on June 30.  If Sherpao was unable to participate, Mirza Qamar Beg, Pakistan's Ambassador in Rome, would attend in Sherpao's place.  According to Shaukat, Beg was a former Federal Commerce Secretary, and he had served in government in law related ministries both in Islamabad and in other parts of Pakistan.  2.  (C) Shaukat said he did not know whether Pakistan would make additional pledges of support, but he believed Pakistan would \"at the very least\" reaffirm its commitment to ongoing judicial and sharia judicial trainings for Afghans.  Shaukat noted Italian Foreign Minister Massimo d'Alema asked President Musharraf for high-level participation in the Conference during a late May meeting in Islamabad.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2798", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/28/2007 11:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002856  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/26/2017 TAGS: PREL, PTER, PK, MOPS, AG SUBJECT: DEPUTY SECRETARY, GEN HYAT, AND GEN UL-HAQ STRESS THE CONTINUED FIGHT AGAINST TERROR  REF: ISLAMABAD 2798  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte, Assistant Secretary Boucher, and Charge d,Affaires Bodde met with Vice Chief of Army Staff GEN Ahsan Saleem Hyat and then separately with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff GEN Ehsan ul-Haq on June 16. Both sides emphasized the importance of continued and enduring cooperation in the war on terror. GEN Hyat focused on Pak-Afghan military cooperation and terrorism's effects on Pakistan. GEN Ehsan ul-Haq discussed the situation in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas FATA) and the holistic approach to fighting terrorism along the Pak-Afghan border. END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------- VCOAS GEN AHSAN SALEEM HYAT -----------------------------  2. (C) Hyat outlined the 28 years of strife that have consumed Afghanistan, including the Soviet invasion, the civil war that followed, and finally 9/11. He gauged that, outside of Afghanistan, the effects of this strife have been felt most acutely in Pakistan. For Pakistan these events have bred extremism, militancy, and sectarianism. These themes were first co-opted to incite people against the Soviets; however, now these same ideas are undermining the fabric of Pakistan. Additionally the large presence of refugees in Pakistan is a significant destabilizing force. Refugees are an issue in camps and also in cities. According to GEN Hyat, the refugees are not all \"bad\" people, but they cause a significant change in demography. He stressed that solving the severe problems in Afghanistan is the only road to peace and democracy in Pakistan.  3. (C) Hyat said that Pakistan does not want to destabilize Afghanistan. However, from his recent talks with President Karzai he inferred that the Afghan president believes there are elements in Pakistan who want to interfere in Afghanistan's internal affairs. Hyat insisted that there was no evidence or intelligence that showed Pakistan trying to destabilize Afghanistan and that such suspicions just waste energy on both sides. On the contrary, the stability of Afghanistan would be beneficial to Pakistan.  4. (C) The Deputy Secretary asked about the Afghan National Army (ANA). Hyat responded that GEN Bismillah Khan of the ANA is a close friend of his and that they visit each other and share ideas; the VCOAS has now invited the ANA to join the joint US-Pakistan special operations training. Hyat commented that the Afghans are \"natural fighters\" and they are trying very hard, but training them to become a professional military will take time. He has invited the ANA to take advantage of any and all of Pakistan's training resources. Hyat told the Afghans, \"we will go to any length to provide what we have;\" however, the Afghans have not accepted the offered military training.  5. (C) Hyat discussed the importance of building a strong military relationship with Afghanistan and increasing trust over time. The Deputy Secretary noted that any long term solution in Afghanistan required an increase in the quantity and quality of Afghan troops. Hyat noted that service tenure in the ANA was only 4 years, and afterwards most soldiers do not re-enlist. In this manner, the ANA is losing trained soldiers. Hyat encouraged increasing the service tenure in the ANA, improving service conditions, and providing benefits as incentives to stay in the armed forces.  ---------------------- CJCS GEN EHSAN UL-HAQ  ISLAMABAD 00002856  002 OF 002   ----------------------  6. (C) GEN Haq said his areas of emphasis were to establish peace and security in Afghanistan and stop terrorism and extremism. This meant not allowing terrorism to take place in Pakistan and not allowing Pakistan to become a base to launch terrorism. He acknowledged the significant remaining challenges but also stressed that Pakistan had come a long way with strong national resolve. He asked the Deputy Secretary for US support and understanding as Pakistan  SIPDIS continues to fight terrorism.  7.(C) Haq described his approach in the FATA as holistic by utilizing political, administrative, economic, and military tools in a robust manner. On the military front, he said his forces are effectively employed wherever they have actionable intelligence. Additionally, his forces are seeking to increase tactical capacity with better division of command and delegation of authority, which hopefully will enable them to react to intelligence more quickly.  8. (C) Haq noted that, with so many people living on and crossing over the border daily, the military needs very strong measures to properly police the border. These include the use of biometric technology and careful fencing. He stressed that Afghanistan must at least recognize the border if the Pakistanis are expected to seal and protect it. Moreover, Haq said that for long lasting stability the Pakistanis need strong Afghan support and coordination for their actions along the border. He hoped that this could be reached through the Tri-Partite Military Group (US, Pakistan, Afghanistan).  9. (C) Haq also commented on the importance of the Frontier Corps and their many sacrifices in the war on terror. The Frontier Corps, according to Haq, were great soldiers under a lot of pressure: being tribesmen themselves this fight was very personal for them. They have been active in the area since 9/11 and have scarce resources. Haq stressed that the Frontier Corps needs help and recognition.  10. The Deputy's staff has cleared this message.     PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "6/29/2007 12:24", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002866  SIPDIS   SIPDIS WARSAW FOR RSEAMAN, ABU DHABI FOR GMULLINAX STATE FOR SCA/PB AND EB/ESC/TFS LLAMBERT TREASURY FOR PDERGARABEDIAN, ASHARMA JUSTICE FOR LSAMUEL  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KTFN, PTER, EFIN, PK SUBJECT: HIGH LEVEL APG DELEGATION TO VISIT REGARDING STALLED AML LEGISLATION   1.  (U) This is an action cable.  Please see paragraph 8.  2.  (SBU) Summary: The Asia Pacific Group is sending a high level delegation to Pakistan July 2-3 in order to impress on the GOP the seriousness with which they regard Pakistan's lack of progress on passing anti-money laundering legislation, which has languished in a standing committee of Parliament for almost two years.  An amendment to the Banking Companies Act, which would have included many of the anti-money laundering provisions in the stalled bill, was attached to budget legislation, but was rejected by the Senate on June 23. Parliamentarian Haroon Piracha, a member of the Standing Committee on Finance in the National Assembly, expressed frustration at the lack of movement on the bill, but also voiced concerns over potential economic ramifications.  Piracha was unaware of the high-level mission as well as of the serious consequences that could result if the APG takes action against Pakistan for failing to pass an internationally acceptable anti-money laundering bill. We request instructions to demarche the GOP on these consequences, to ensure that the Government is cognizant of the possible ramifications of its foot dragging. End Summary.  3.  (SBU) Background: In 2002, the Department of Justice (DOJ) worked closely with the GOP to craft an anti-money laundering (AML) bill that would meet international standards.  Before the bill could reach the Cabinet for a vote, it was changed in order to \"harmonize\" with the Indian AML legislation - which did not meet international standards, according to the DOJ.  Eventually the GOP revised the bill again; however, it still fell short of what was needed to meet Financial Action Task Force (FATF) requirements.  In September 2005, the AML draft legislation was approved by the Cabinet.  While it was closer to meeting international standards, it still fell short in several key areas; namely money laundering itself was not considered an independent crime, and asset seizure and forfeiture provisions were inadequate.  The bill was sent to the Standing Committee on Finance for review and possible amendment before being sent to a vote by the full National Assembly.  4.  (SBU) On June 28, Econoff met with Parliamentarian Haroon Piracha from the ruling PML-Q party. Piracha, a US-educated banker, joined the Standing Committee on Finance in December 2006. Piracha informed Econoff the Standing Committee had completed its review of the bill and passed it back to the Ministry of Finance (MOF).  5.  (SBU) The Standing Committee on Finance formed a subcommittee comprising 5-7 members in order to expedite the committee's final review of MOF changes before sending it to the full National Assembly for a vote.  Piracha said the subcommittee had not met yet.  (Note: In a conflicting statement, Javed Malik, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Finance, told Econcounselor June 12 that the bill was currently being reviewed by this subcommittee and that the legislation would be put into final form by June 25 and submitted to the National Assembly.  Malik was aware of the APG's impending visit and appeared anxious to demonstrate that progress was being made, but as of June 29, the bill is still in limbo. End Note) Econoff offered to have the Embassy's Legal Advisor review the final amendments with the subcommittee, an offer Piracha welcomed, once he returned from a trip abroad in a few weeks.  6.  (SBU) Although he agrees that a comprehensive money-laundering bill should be passed, Piracha voiced concerns over its potential economic ramifications.  He feared that recent banking sector reforms that encouraged overseas Pakistanis to send their remittances through legal banking channels instead of hawalas or hundis could be undone. Concerns about monitoring of transactions might also discourage investment in Pakistan. The provision for asset forfeiture, he believed, could be abused for political reasons. Piracha promised to give us a copy of the final version of the bill.   ISLAMABAD 00002866  002 OF 002   7.  (SBU) Econoff informed Piracha that a high-level mission from the Asia Pacific Group (APG) was scheduled to visit Pakistan July 2-3 to discuss the status of the AML bill and the consequences of further inaction. (Note: The APG is a regional, FATF-like organization tasked with disrupting money-laundering channels.  End Note) Econoff informed Piracha of the negative ramifications if Pakistan were to be placed on the APG's \"watch list.\" They include: the cessation of all correspondent banking relations between the U.S. and Pakistan; the generation of a Suspicious Transaction Report for all transactions involving Pakistani banks; and a three-day hold on all international money transfers cleared through U.S. banks.  Piracha expressed shock at the extent of possible APG sanctions, and agreed it was imperative Parliament pass the bill quickly. Piracha said all parliamentarians were concerned about the date of the next elections, and that if they happen more quickly than expected, the new legislature would have to start from \"ground zero\" with the AML bill.  Piracha believes the bill should be voted on no later than September in order to ensure this Parliament will review it, otherwise it will be another long wait.  8.  (SBU) Action Requested: It does not appear that there is general awareness in Pakistan of the possible repercussions of failing to pass AML legislation in the near future.  The impending visit of the APG delegation is a signal that patience is wearing thin.  Post requests Demarche instructions for delivery to the GOP highlighting the consequences of being placed on the APG's watch list.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/1/2007 10:53", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002870  SIPDIS  AID/ANE FOR NMADHAV, RSTEELMAN AID/OFDA FOR RTHAYER, TDOLAN  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: DISASTER DECLARATION -- CYCLONE YEMYIN  1. (U) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST:  This cable declares areas affected by Cyclone Yemyin in Sindh and Balochistan provinces as a disaster, and requests U.S. government emergency assistance for those in need.  The powerful cyclone is traveling along southern Pakistani coastal areas, killing over 235 people and devastating communities with high winds and flooding, leaving 250,000 people homeless.  The U.S. Government (USG) has been in contact with the Government of Pakistan, the UN, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to coordinate a response to this tragedy.  Exercising her authority, Charge d'Affaires Anne Patterson is providing USD 50,000 to support emergency relief efforts in the affected areas.  In consultation with the OFDA Regional Advisor, Charge requests an additional USD 226,000 from OFDA for a total of 276,000 in emergency assistance to be awarded to Mercy Corps.  If needed, additional assistance will be requested of OFDA.  END SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST.  ----------------- Current Situation -----------------  2. (U) On Monday, June 25, 2007 Pakistani authorities evacuated thousands of people from the southern Pakistani coastal areas of Sindh and Balochistan as a powerful storm intensified into tropical Cyclone Yemyin.  The storm began over the weekend with high winds and flash flooding, killing over 235 people in the port city of Karachi and approximately 20 others in southwestern Balochistan, where heavy intermittent rains are expected to continue.  Along with the loss of life, there is severe damage to homes and infrastructure.  An estimated 250,000 people are homeless and many are injured.  In Balochistan several dams around Turbat have reached dangerous levels.  3. (U) Economic losses include: commercial activity in Karachi brought to a halt; port activities severely disrupted; likely widespread damage to the Sindh cotton crop; loss to cash crops in the Sindh coastal region; anticipated widespread loss of livestock; infrastructure and livelihood losses to the fisheries industry.  The most vulnerable people will likely suffer the most due to loss of habitat and livelihood and increased susceptibility to disease.  ------------------------------- Government of Pakistan Response -------------------------------  4. (U) The Pakistani Army, Navy, and paramilitary forces have all been put on high alert.  The Navy is monitoring Karachi's surrounding islands, and paramilitary forces have assisted witth large-scale evacuations of residents from coastal regions to goverment schools further inland.  People located in areas in close proximity to rivers and downstream from the Mirani Dam have also been evacuated. Traffic on the Coastal Highway linking Karachi with Gwadar has also been suspended. In addition, the Government has established cells to monitor the situation and make necessary arrangements in view of the cyclone.  5. (U) An official Pakistani government statement has noted that Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz has ordered the immediate airlift of blankets, food, tents and medicine because several main highways have been badly damaged.  Relief helicopters  ISLAMABAD 00002870  002 OF 002   are ready but the weather is not permitting the delivery of supplies.  6.(U) Emergency has been declared in seven districts in Balochistan -- Kech, Gwadar, Jhal Magsi, Bolan, Naseer Abad, Jaffar Abad and Labsela.  A Provincial Emergency Relief Cell has been established and district coordination officers of these districts have been designated as Emergency Relief Coordinators who will be in charge of all emergency operations in these districts.  7. (U) Balochistan's Chief Minister has allocated a sum of 100 million Rupees (approximately USD 1.67 million) to provide emergency relief to the affected people in these seven districts.  This amount is in addition to 200 million Rupees (approximately USD 3.33 million) allocated by Prime Minister Aziz.  ------------------------ U.S. Government Response ------------------------  8. (U) The Charge has determined that Cyclone Yemyin meets the necessary criteria for the USD 276,000 to be released: 1) a disaster exists in Pakistan; 2) the Government of Pakistan does not object to USG providing emergency assistance; and 3) such assistance is in the USG's interest.  9. (U) The State Department, the USAID/Pakistan Mission, and the Regional Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) are in coordination for an emergency response.  USAID/Pakistan has also contacted the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and international NGOs. These NGOs include Catholic Relief Services in interior Sindh and Mercy Corps and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) in Sindh and Balochistan. Mercy Corps is assisting some communities along the Balochi coast and IFRC is providing food and non-food items for distribution by the Pakistan Army in Balochistan and Sindh.  10. (U) CHARGE'S NOTE: Under this declaration, I am requesting USD 50,000 to meet the immediate humanitarian assistance needs of the cyclone-affected areas in Balochistan and Sindh provinces.  Furthermore, in consultation with the OFDA Regional Advisor, an additional USD 226,000 is requested from OFDA for a total of USD 276,000 to be awarded to Mercy Corps for the provision of emergency relief supplies.  END CHARGE'S NOTE.  11. (U) The Department of State and USAID, in conjunction with OFDA, continue to monitor the situation.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/2/2007 7:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002873  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/02/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MONITORING PAKISTAN'S COALITION SUPPORT FUNDS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.5 (b),(d).  1.  (C)  Summary:  Post increasingly has engaged the GOP to ensure that Coalition Support Funds (CSF), used to reimburse Pakistan for costs related to the fight against al Qaeda and the Taliban, are reasonable and credible. We have asked for additional information in order to verify pending Pakistani requests.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Recognizing the financial burden that the war on terror places on Pakistan, Congress has authorized the USG to reimburse Islamabad for its contribution to our mutual efforts. Through May 2007, Pakistan has requested reimbursement for $5.6 billion; the U.S. had paid Pakistan $4.9 billion in CSF since October 2001.  3.  (C)  In order to be effective, CSF should be flexible and speedy. However, since 2006, we have engaged the GOP seeking verification that its CSF requests were reasonable and credible.  Following a series of meetings, which included delivery of a request for information from DOD U/S Edelman to the Pakistan MinDef, post has requested additional clarification on expenses.  4.  (C)  Pending post verification are claims that total $279 million for the March-May 2007 period.  The areas of greatest concern to us include costs for helicopter operations ($83 million annually), radar maintenance ($65 million annually) and Joint Staff operations ($5 million annually).  We are also seeking confirmation of the location of bunkers constructed ($35 million) and roads built ($20 million) since July 2006, and we have requested answers to anomalies in the cost of rations, flak vests and accommodations maintenance.  5.  (C)  Post will continue to seek answers that ensure CSF is spent in accordance with Congressional guidelines.     PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE86406", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/2/2007 12:36", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002889  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR L/DL KRISTINA DAUGIRDAS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PHUM, KCRM, AE, SU, BG, MR, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTANI RESPONSE TO CAMEL JOCKEY CONFERENCE IN UAE, JUNE 26-27  REF: STATE 86406  1. SUMMARY:  Poloff met with Khizar Hayat Khan, Joint Secretary at the Ministry of Interior, a GOP participant at  SIPDIS the UAE-hosted Camel Jockey conference in Abu Dhabi, June 26-27.  Khan is preparing a longer analysis of the GOP's expectations from the bilateral MOU for his Minister and promised to share it with us later this week.  Currently, however, the GOP seems quite satisfied with the proposals and framework developed with the UAE regarding compensation/rehabilitation of the Pakistani children freed from servitude as camel jockeys in the UAE.  Response to specific questions detailed in reftel follow.  END SUMMARY.  2.a) Does your government expect all former child camel jockeys to use the compensation process established by the MOU?  Yes, but the GOP foresees a process that involves rehabilitation as well as compensation -- something with a longer-term impact on the child, the family and even the community.  b) If a former child camel jockey does not pursue compensation through the MOU claims process, does the MOU permit the child or his parents instead to seek compensation in your country's courts?  In the courts of the UAE?  In the courts of third countries, including the United States?  The GOP will allow those who do not wish to pursue compensation under the MOU to appeal directly to the Secretary of the Ministry of Interior for relief.  Failing that, they may register a case in the Pakistani court system.  c) If a former child camel jockey requests but is denied compensation through the MOU claims process, does the MOU permit the child or his parents then to seek compensation in your country's courts?  In the courts of the UAE?  In the courts of third countries, including the United States?  The same process as above will prevail, appeal to the Secretary of the Ministry, then registration of a court case in Pakistan.  d) If a former child camel jockey requests and receives compensation that he or his parents believe is inadequate, does the MOU permit the child or his parents then to seek additional compensation in your country's courts?  In the courts of the UAE?  In courts of third countries, including the United States? Same process -- appeal to the Secretary of the Ministry, followed by a court case in Pakistan.  e) If the claims facility does not in fact operate in accordance with the MOU, will court actions that would otherwise be barred by the MOU become permissible? Yes, if the facility fails to operate as envisioned in the MOU, the government of Pakistan reserves the option of initiating court action (on behalf of the children) against the UAE in Pakistani courts or at an international forum.  f) What steps is your government taking to ensure that the child camel jockeys (and their parents) are aware of the claims process and to facilitate the filing of claims?  In addition to media (radio, television and print) campaigns, the GOP will request local religious and social leaders in the affected areas to strongly promote the process.  The GOP will create mobile teams to visit the areas where the camel jockeys were recruited to explain the claims process and help process claims.  The GOP already has a list of several hundred child jockeys repatriated from the UAE in the past few years, so they know the general magnitude of the problem at hand.  g) Would a lawsuit in the United States seeking compensation for former child camel jockeys have any impact on the implementation of the claims facility or of the UAE-UNICEF program in your country?  It would be difficult to say at present.  Such a move could complicate the MOU process and may slow down the compensation/rehabilitation process. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2829", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/3/2007 15:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002905  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DS/ITA DS/IP/SCA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/03/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PTER, PK SUBJECT: SITREP ISLAMABAD 20:00 LOCAL -- CONFRONTATION AT RED MOSQUE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2829       B. ISLAMABAD 2468      C. ISLAMABAD 2334      D. ISLAMABAD 2270      E. ISLAMABAD 1846      F. ISLAMABAD 1688      G. ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4(b)(d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  Pakistani police forces have engaged with militants at the \"Red Mosque\" throughout July 3.  The Government of Pakistan has been under pressure to take action against the mosque since January 2007.  Armed militants run the mosque and control its large female population.  Today, the government exercised restraint until a series of provocations, including automatic weapon fire directed at law enforcement and an attack on a nearby government building, prompted authorities to use tear gas and gunfire.  Embassy has reported extensively on the Red Mosque and the issues leading up to this event (see reftels).  Post is uncertain about casualties, but some Pakistani police and a cameraman have been killed.  Possibly as many as fifty students have been killed and/or injured with a number of women affected by tear gas moved to local hospitals.  Embassy is in touch with local authorities and embassy's FSN surveillance detection team is reporting from the site.  An American reporter in the mosque earlier in the day is safe.  There is speculation that Pakistani forces may move into the mosque after dark.  2. (C) We believe that all Americans are safe and accounted for.  CODEL Davis with six members arrived early evening July 3 and is safely in the hotel.  END SUMMARY  ------------------- Violence breaks out ------------------- 3. (C) Early July 3, Pakistani police forces began erecting a barbed wire fence around the Red Mosque compound in Islamabad.  In response, around 300 female madrassah residents on the mosque's roof shouted to male militants in the compound, exhorting them to take action against the law enforcement authorities putting up the barrier.  These male militants reportedly opened fire first.  The police responded initially by firing tear gas canisters, and later with gunfire.  The male militants (as many as 2,000-3,000), some wearing gas masks and standing behind sand bag defenses, are heavily armed with automatic weapons.  4. (C) As of 20:00 local time, the militants continue to exchange fire with police and Rangers.  Media and post sources indicate that there are up to 5,000 government forces surrounding the mosque.  Hundreds of onlookers, people arriving for prayers, and journalists are also standing in the vicinity.  Local hospitals are taking in gunshot wound victims.  Some embassy sources speculate that the police and Rangers plan to launch an assault against the mosque after nightfall.  ---------- Casualties ---------- 5. (U) Local television broadcasts and embassy sources have reported the following casualties as of 19:30 local time: -- 2 Punjab Rangers or policemen killed by gunfire; -- 10 militants killed by gunfire (estimates have ranged from 5-10); -- 1 news cameraman killed by gunfire (there are also unconfirmed reports of a second dead journalist); -- 1 merchant killed who was caught in crossfire; -- 60 to 70 militants injured by gunfire, including female militants.  6. (U) Dozens of mosque women were evacuated to local hospitals for exposure to tear gas.  ------------------------  ISLAMABAD 00002905  002 OF 002   Amcit Time reporter safe ------------------------ 7. (C) Post learned at 16:30 local time that Amcit Erin Baker, a journalist with Time Magazine, was in the Red Mosque compound.  A Pakistani think tank researcher had taken her to the mosque at 11:30 in the morning.  When the gunfire began, Ms. Baker remained inside the mosque, but then was able to leave during a lull in the fighting.  RSO contacted Ms. Baker by cell phone and confirmed that she left the mosque safely. DCM has communicated this information to the Operations Center.  --------------------------------------------- ------- Ministry building set on fire, unconfirmed explosion --------------------------------------------- ------- 8. (C) During the afternoon, male militants also set fire to the Ministry of Environment, located near the Red Mosque, ostensibly because Punjab Rangers were occupying the building.  (The Environment Minister later appeared on local television and denied Rangers had been present in the building.)  As of 19:30 local time, post does not know the extent of damage at the Ministry, although there are unconfirmed reports of 5 to 7 casualties resulting from the fire and/or an explosion there.  9. (C) At approximately 17:30 local time, sources in the vicinity of the Red Mosque heard a large explosion.  Local media reported this may have been a suicide bombing.  The mosque's extremist leader, mullah Abdur Ghazi, claimed it was a suicide attack on the building.  Embassy sources in the area said the explosion was not a suicide bomber, and we are seeking additional information.  -------------------------------- Embassy response / Actions taken -------------------------------- 10. (C) Post initiated its phone cascade procedure to ensure that all American staff are safe and accounted for.  Post also issued a text message to all personnel (American and locally engaged staff) advising them of the situation and to avoid all unnecessary travel tonight.  Post management decided at 19:00 local time not to call an Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meeting because most EAC members had already left the embassy, and it would have been unwise for them to drive back to the embassy compound.  Post will continue to monitor the situation throughout the night and decide if an EAC is necessary tomorrow July 4.  11. (C) At least four embassy residences are in the same sector as the Red Mosque (G 6/3).  Post has determined that these residences are not in any immediate danger but we will continue to monitor the situation.  12. (C) CODEL Davis, with six members and two staff, arrived evening of July 3 and are safely in the hotel.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647|07ISLAMABAD1688|07ISLAMABAD1846|07ISLAMABAD2270|07ISLAMABAD2334|07ISLAMABAD2468|07ISLAMABAD2829|07ISLAMABAD2905|07ISLAMABAD2907", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/4/2007 11:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002907  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/04/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE -- SITREP ISLAMABAD 15:30 LOCAL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2905      B. ISLAMABAD 2829      C. ISLAMABAD 2468      D. ISLAMABAD 2334      E. ISLAMABAD 2270      F. ISLAMABAD 1846      G. ISLAMABAD 1688      H. ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b) (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  The Pakistan Army has taken command of government forces in the immediate area of the Lal Masjid (Red Mosque).  Approximately 700 people inside the mosque surrendered at the urging of the government; approximately 3,200 remain.  Prime Minister Aziz told visiting Codel Davis July 4 that the situation was unfolding better than expected, and that the government would continue to allow time for additional militants and occupants to surrender.  EAC convened and decided to move Embassy staff living in the vicinity of the Red Mosque until the situation is resolved; July 4 activities at the EMR will continue as planned.  Small protests against government action on Lal Masjid took place in the Northwest Frontier Province, FATA, and Balochistan. End Summary.  -------- Timeline --------  2.  (C) Law enforcement authorities and militants at Lal Masjid continued to exchange sporadic gunfire into the early morning hours of July 4.  As of 15:30 local time, authorities had not launched a major offensive operation against the mosque.  The government instead encouraged militants, women, and children in the mosque to surrender by certain deadlines, each of which was extended as occupants continued to surrender.  At this time, approximately 500 male and 200 female occupants have surrendered to authorities; police estimated approximately 3,200 remained in the mosque compound.  3.  (C) At approximately 2:00 AM July 3, the government announced over loudspeakers a 3:30 AM deadline for the militants' surrender.  The deadline passed without any of the militants surrendering, but rangers and police did not launch an operation against the mosque.  At an undetermined time during the night, authorities cut off the mosque's electricity and water.  Embassy sources reported the mosque's backup generator was not functioning.  4.  (C) At approximately 9:00 AM July 4, authorities announced that militants and occupants wishing to surrender before a new 11:00 AM deadline could meet their parents, whom Interior Ministry officials had contacted during the night, at a nearby market; those who surrendered were promised 5,000 rupees (about $80) for the journey home.  (Note:  Many mosque occupants were from poorer parts of the Northwest Frontier Province.  End Note.)  Between 9:00 AM and 11:00 AM, approximately 120 individuals (100 male and 20 female) surrendered to authorities and met family members at nearby Aabpara market.  Media reported law enforcement authorities searched the men and women, asked them to confirm their families' names, and questioned many of the male occupants who had surrendered.  Embassy sources reported certain surrendering male occupants suspected of criminal acts were detained for further questioning and might face legal prosecution.  5.  (C) Minutes after 11:00 AM, authorities opened fire on the mosque and militants.  After a brief exchange of fire between rangers and militants, law enforcement signaled a cease-fire and announced an extension of the deadline for occupants wishing to surrender to 12:00 PM.  Another 50 men and women surrendered before noon, and authorities again extended the surrender deadline.  Authorities told Embassy sources they hoped to continue extending the deadline as long as occupants kept surrendering in steady numbers.  Several of those who surrendered told embassy sources the situation inside the mosque was tense; there was a core group of committed militants urging others not to surrender.   ISLAMABAD 00002907  002 OF 002   Senior Officials Meet, Negotiations Begin ----------------------------------------  6.  (C) Prime Minister Aziz met with senior government officials and Pakistan's Council of Ulema (respected Islamic leadership) throughout the night to discuss the Red Mosque situation.  Maulana Fazlur Rehman, leader of the JUI-F political party and Council of Ulema, mediated between government officials and Red Mosque leader mullah Abdur Ghazi on July 3 and 4.  EAC and Embassy Action ----------------------  7.  (C) Post held an Emergency Action Committee at 2:15 PM on July 4.  American personnel in residences in the vicinity of the Red Mosque will be moved and will stay with other embassy staff until the area is reopened.  The Red Mosque area will be off-limits for Americans until further notice.  A revised Warden Notice is being distributed, and RSO initiated a phone cascade on July 4 to ensure all American staff were safe and accounted for.  The EAC agreed security precautions for July 4 activities at the Embassy compound were appropriate, and the event would continue as planned.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2905", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/4/2007 12:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002908  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/04/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE -- SITREP ISLAMABAD 15:30 LOCAL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 02905       B. ISLAMABAD 2829      C. ISLAMABAD 2468      D. ISLAMABAD 2334      E. ISLAMABAD 2270      F. ISLAMABAD 1846      G. ISLAMABAD 1688      H. ISLAMABAD 1647  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b) (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  The Pakistan Army has taken command of government forces in the immediate area of the Lal Masjid (Red Mosque).  Approximately 700 people inside the mosque surrendered at the urging of the government; approximately 3,200 remain.  Prime Minister Aziz told visiting Codel Davis July 4 that the situation was unfolding better than expected, and that the government would continue to allow time for additional militants and occupants to surrender.  EAC convened and decided to move Embassy staff living in the vicinity of the Red Mosque until the situation is resolved; July 4 activities at the EMR will continue as planned.  Small protests against government action on Lal Masjid took place in the Northwest Frontier Province, FATA, and Balochistan. End Summary.  -------- Timeline --------  2.  (C) Law enforcement authorities and militants at Lal Masjid continued to exchange sporadic gunfire into the early morning hours of July 4.  As of 15:30 local time, authorities had not launched a major offensive operation against the mosque.  The government instead encouraged militants, women, and children in the mosque to surrender by certain deadlines, each of which was extended as occupants continued to surrender.  At this time, approximately 500 male and 200 female occupants have surrendered to authorities; police estimated approximately 3,200 remained in the mosque compound.  3.  (C) At approximately 2:00 AM July 3, the government announced over loudspeakers a 3:30 AM deadline for the militants' surrender.  The deadline passed without any of the militants surrendering, but rangers and police did not launch an operation against the mosque.  At an undetermined time during the night, authorities cut off the mosque's electricity and water.  Embassy sources reported the mosque's backup generator was not functioning.  4.  (C) At approximately 9:00 AM July 4, authorities announced that militants and occupants wishing to surrender before a new 11:00 AM deadline could meet their parents, whom Interior Ministry officials had contacted during the night, at a nearby market; those who surrendered were promised 5,000 rupees (about $80) for the journey home.  (Note:  Many mosque occupants were from poorer parts of the Northwest Frontier Province.  End Note.)  Between 9:00 AM and 11:00 AM, approximately 120 individuals (100 male and 20 female) surrendered to authorities and met family members at nearby Aabpara market.  Media reported law enforcement authorities searched the men and women, asked them to confirm their families' names, and questioned many of the male occupants who had surrendered.  Embassy sources reported certain surrendering male occupants suspected of criminal acts were detained for further questioning and might face legal prosecution.  5.  (C) Minutes after 11:00 AM, authorities opened fire on the mosque and militants.  After a brief exchange of fire between rangers and militants, law enforcement signaled a cease-fire and announced an extension of the deadline for occupants wishing to surrender to 12:00 PM.  Another 50 men and women surrendered before noon, and authorities again extended the surrender deadline.  Authorities told Embassy sources they hoped to continue extending the deadline as long as occupants kept surrendering in steady numbers.  Several of those who surrendered told embassy sources the situation inside the mosque was tense; there was a core group of committed militants urging others not to surrender.   ISLAMABAD 00002908  002 OF 002   Senior Officials Meet, Negotiations Begin ----------------------------------------  6.  (C) Prime Minister Aziz met with senior government officials and Pakistan's Council of Ulema (respected Islamic leadership) throughout the night to discuss the Red Mosque situation.  Maulana Fazlur Rehman, leader of the JUI-F political party and Council of Ulema, mediated between government officials and Red Mosque leader mullah Abdur Ghazi on July 3 and 4.  EAC and Embassy Action ----------------------  7.  (C) Post held an Emergency Action Committee at 2:15 PM on July 4.  American personnel in residences in the vicinity of the Red Mosque will be moved and will stay with other embassy staff until the area is reopened.  The Red Mosque area will be off-limits for Americans until further notice.  A revised Warden Notice is being distributed, and RSO initiated a phone cascade on July 4 to ensure all American staff were safe and accounted for.  The EAC agreed security precautions for July 4 activities at the Embassy compound were appropriate, and the event would continue as planned.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/5/2007 6:39", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002919  SIPDIS   AID/ANE FOR: NMADHAV, RSTEELMAN AID/OFDA FOR: RTHAYER, TDOLAN  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SITUATION REPORT #1 - CYCLONE YEMYIN  1.  (U) On Monday, July 2, 2007 Major General Farooq Ahmad Khan, Chairman of the Pakistan National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) held a meeting with the donor and diplomatic community to provide a briefing on the impact of the recent cyclone, what the Government of PakistanQs (GOP) response is, and discuss next steps.  2.  (U) The NDMA has established a website, http://www.ndma.gov.pk, which will be the official source of information to the donor community on the cyclone and its aftermath.  The website will include MAJ GEN FarooqQs presentation.  3.  (U) MAJ GEN Farooq informed the donor and diplomatic community that the GOP and the NDMA had done a good job in managing the impact of the cyclone, but that international support from the Qfriends of PakistanQ was needed and desired in the form of cash, medicines, and water purification supplies.  4.  (U) The NDMA through its early warning system had limited the number of people killed in the cyclone. This included warning people in coastal area of the incoming storm and in notifying fishermen and preventing them from going to sea.  Given the magnitude of the storm, only approximately 225 people died.  If the NDMA had not acted decisively the number of deaths would have been much greater.  5.  (U) Since the storm the NDMA has established five logistical centers that are using military assets to deliver needed supplies by both air and road.  The GOP has provided 200 million Rupees (approximately USD 3.33 million) to relief operations so far.  GOP has sent two army brigades to Balochistan to supervise the relief effort and to keep civil order.  To date the Army has provided 41 C-130 sorties delivering 80,000 KG of food to Balochistan and 150,000 KG of food to Sindh.  The Army has also provided 12,000 tents and is purchasing an additional 100,000.  6. (U) Balochistan suffered significant damage to its infrastructure.  The main highway between Wad and Bela has been severely damaged.  In addition, the Gawadar and Lasbella highway, known as the coastal highway, has been breeched at several points, with bridges being washed away.  The Iranian Ambassador in a Q&A session after the presentation mentioned that roads have been washed away on both the Iranian and Balochistan side of the border at four of the five entry points.  The only useable point of entry is at Tafton.  Several water embankments in the Quetta area failed and these caused major damage.  However, MAJ GEN Farooq mentioned that the Mirani Dam held, which prevented significant damage.  There was no major infrastructure damage in Sindh and the Army has not deployed significant numbers there.  7.  (U) The GOP intends to establish a Disaster Management Fund, where donors can contribute cash and in-kind.  (COMMENT: Creation of the fund was a recommendation made by USAIDQs Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) based on lessons learned from previous disaster and emergency relief  ISLAMABAD 00002919  002 OF 002   experience.  END COMMENT.)  When asked if the United Nations could receive donor contributions for the Fund, Farooq replied that the decision to do this had not yet been made.  NDMA intends to undertake damage assessments and is inviting donor participation in these assessments.  It intends to adapt the UN cluster approach to identifying damage done to different sectors, e.g. health and education, in forming its own clusters.  Details of this approach still need to be worked out.  Updates and progress of relief activities will be posted on NDMAQs website.  8.  (U) MAJ GEN Farooq cautioned that another major weather system is approaching Pakistan this week, which will also have a potentially serious impact on the cyclone-affected regions.   Patterson " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647|07ISLAMABAD1688|07ISLAMABAD1846|07ISLAMABAD2270|07ISLAMABAD2334|07ISLAMABAD2468|07ISLAMABAD2829|07ISLAMABAD2905|07ISLAMABAD2908", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/5/2007 11:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002932  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DS/ITA DS/IP/SCA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/05/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE -- SITREP 16:00 LOCAL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2908      B. ISLAMABAD 2905      C. ISLAMABAD 2829      D. ISLAMABAD 2468      E. ISLAMABAD 2334      F. ISLAMABAD 2270      G. ISLAMABAD 1846      H. ISLAMABAD 1688      I. ISLAMABAD 1647  1.  (SBU) Summary:  Lal Masjid leader mullah Abdul Aziz was arrested July 4 while trying to escape disguised as a woman in a burqa.  Pakistan Army Rangers estimate close to a thousand people have surrendered from the mosque.  Abdur Rashid Ghazi, the remaining mullah in the mosque, reaffirmed his commitment to facing down the government.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU) As of 16:30 local time, the Pakistan Army had not launched a major assault against the mosque amid continuing surrenders of occupants (see reftels).  The Director General of Operations for the Punjab Rangers today announced 578 male and 374 female mosque occupants had surrendered since July 3; he further stated approximately 400 militants remained in the compound.  Media estimates of surrender numbers and remaining mosque occupants were significantly higher.  Authorities relaxed a curfew imposed in the general area of Lal Masjid from 1:30 to 3:30 PM; this did not apply to the immediate vicinity of the mosque, which remains off-limits.  Estimates of the death toll ranged from 17 to 25.  American staff with residences near the mosque were moved yesterday and will remain temporarily housed with colleagues until the situation is resolved.  3.  (SBU) Post confirms Lal Masjid leader mullah Abdul Aziz was arrested the night of July 4 while trying to escape the mosque compound disguised as a woman in a burqa.  During an interview on a government sponsored television channel, Aziz, still in his burqa, said the militants could not repel the government's troops.  Aziz' brother Abdur Rashid Ghazi remained in control of Lal Masjid and publicly reaffirmed the mosque's commitment to resisting a government attack. Parliamentarian and leader of the opposition Fazlur Rehman's attempts to broker a peace deal fell through when Ghazi refused to unconditionally surrender.  4.  (U) Pakistan Army helicopters have been periodically used as a show of force over the Red Mosque since approximately 18:30 July 4.  Sporadic exchanges of gunfire between militants and authorities continue to occur infrequently.  5.  (SBU) Comment:  Despite the ongoing situation at the Red Mosque, it is business-as-usual throughout the rest of Islamabad.  All Mission operations are functioning normally; all staff are accounted for; and the overall mood in the city is guarded but calm.  Embassy staff observed some Ranger unit convoys departing the city this morning.  We will continue to monitor the situation closely.  End Comment.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2908", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/5/2007 13:01", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002934  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DS/ITA DS/IP/SCA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PHUM, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE -- SITREP 16:00 LOCAL  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2908       B. ISLAMABAD 2905      C. ISLAMABAD 2829      D. ISLAMABAD 2468      E. ISLAMABAD 2334      F. ISLAMABAD 2270      G. ISLAMABAD 1846      H. ISLAMABAD 1688      I. ISLAMABAD 1647  1.  (SBU) Summary:  Lal Masjid leader mullah Abdul Aziz was arrested July 4 while trying to escape disguised as a woman in a burqa.  Pakistan Army Rangers estimate close to a thousand people have surrendered from the mosque.  Abdur Rashid Ghazi, the remaining mullah in the mosque, reaffirmed his commitment to facing down the government.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU) As of 16:00 local time, the Pakistan Army had not launched a major assault against the mosque amid continuing surrenders of occupants (see reftels).  The Director General of Operations for the Punjab Rangers today announced 578 male and 374 female mosque occupants had surrendered since July 3; he further stated approximately 400 militants remained in the compound.  Media estimates of surrender numbers and remaining mosque occupants were significantly higher.  Authorities relaxed a curfew imposed in the general area of Lal Masjid from 13:30 to 15:30; this did not apply to the immediate vicinity of the mosque, which remains off-limits.  Estimates of the death toll ranged from 17 to 25.  American staff with residences near the mosque were moved yesterday and will remain temporarily housed with colleagues until the situation is resolved.  3.  (SBU) Post confirms Lal Masjid leader mullah Abdul Aziz was arrested the night of July 4 while trying to escape the mosque compound disguised as a woman in a burqa.  During an interview on a government sponsored television channel, Aziz, still in his burqa, said the militants could not repel the government's troops.  Aziz' brother Abdur Rashid Ghazi remained in control of Lal Masjid and publicly reaffirmed the mosque's commitment to resisting a government attack. Parliamentarian and leader of the opposition Fazlur Rehman's attempts to broker a peace deal fell through when Ghazi refused to unconditionally surrender.  4.  (U) Pakistan Army helicopters have been periodically used as a show of force over the Red Mosque since approximately 18:30 July 4.  Sporadic exchanges of gunfire between militants and authorities continue to occur infrequently.  5.  (SBU) Comment:  Despite the ongoing situation at the Red Mosque, it is business-as-usual throughout the rest of Islamabad.  All Mission operations are functioning normally; all staff are accounted for; and the overall mood in the city is guarded but calm.  Embassy staff observed some Ranger unit convoys departing the city this morning.  We will continue to monitor the situation closely.  End Comment.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1842", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/6/2007 7:19", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002944  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S ELECTIONS: SOLVING THE VOTER ROLL CONTROVERSY  REF: ISLAMABAD 1842  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Post is quietly engaged with senior Pakistani officials to press for a resolution to credible opposition complaints that perhaps 20 million voters have dropped off the latest Election Commission of Pakistan's voter list.  A potential data merger of the Election Commission and National Identity Card lists could add 12-22 million voters to the list; a government decision to subsidize issuance of identity cards could help enfranchise poorer women.  Despite concerns about the capability of the Commission, we believe that USAID/IFES efforts have already made a positive contribution to what will be an improved, but still imperfect, election process in Pakistan this year.  End Summary.  2. (U) The 2002 general and 2005 local elections revealed institutional and political problems in Pakistan's electoral system, including fraudulent/duplicative voter lists, interference by the intelligence services, violent intimidation of election workers and voters, voter apathy, and weak efforts at registration and substantive campaigning by political parties. USAID/IFES, the International Republican Institute, National Democratic Institute, UN Development Program, European Union, Asia Foundation and international donors are all working on various projects to ensure the 2007 elections will be free, fair and transparent.  These include projects to revise voter rolls, conduct polls, train election officials and party workers, raise public awareness, and provide transparent ballot boxes.  This is the second of a series on Pakistan's 2007 elections, and it addresses efforts to update the voter rolls.  Missing: 20 Million Voters? ---------------------------  3. (U) The voter list for the 2002 and 2005 elections, which contained 70 million names, was compiled using 1998 census data.  In an attempt to reduce fraud and comply with a 1974 law that required citizens to present a national identity card to vote, the Election Commission in 2006 announced that citizens would be required to have a new Computerized National Identity Card in order to register and vote.  Under a USAID contract, IFES is helping the Commission to update and clean up the voter rolls.  Before IFES was embedded in the Commission, however, the Commission conducted what many NGOs and opposition political parties have criticized as a poorly executed house-to-house survey.  Based on that survey, the Commission issued a new draft voter list.  Of an estimated 82 million eligible voters in 2007, the Commission's revised list includes 52 million, of whom only 36 million have the new identity cards.  4. (U) The new draft voter list was released for public display countrywide in mid-June, and the Commission engaged in a public relations campaign to woo voters to the 45,000 display centers countrywide to confirm that their names were on the draft list and, if not, to register. The display period was scheduled to end on July 3.  NGO, press, and Mission's observations of these display centers confirm that few voters have visited the display centers, many of which are not open or adequately staffed.  5. (C) Elimination of fraudulent or duplicate names explains some, but certainly not all, of the discrepancy in numbers. Not surprisingly, the news that perhaps 20 million voters had dropped off of the list created an uproar among the opposition parties.  The latest protest came in the form of a Supreme Court petition submitted by Pakistan People's Party Chairman Benazir Bhutto last week.  The petition complained about the loss of large numbers of voters and argued that the Commission cannot require voters to show their the new identity cards in order to register to vote. The petition also complained that the Commission had not supplied political parties with electronic copies of the draft voter rolls, which made it more difficult for them to determine which voters fell off the list.  (Note: While the People's  ISLAMABAD 00002944  002 OF 002   Party is complaining about the process, the press reports that the smaller religious parties are actually out registering voters.)  6. (U) Although the Commission has not responded specifically to the Supreme Court petition, Commission Secretary Kanwar Dilshad has publicly defended the national identity card requirement as a fraud prevention measure and emphasized that the 21-day display period is the time for voters to rectify any mistakes made on the list.  NADRA National Identity Cards -----------------------------  7. (U) Beginning in 2002, the National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) began an ongoing process of producing and distributing new biometric Computerized National Identity Cards.  NADRA is a for-profit agency that receives no government funding.  NADRA charges 75 rupees ($1.25) for each card, which makes them inaccessible for the poorest Pakistanis.  (Note: The old national identity cards were issued free of charge.) In some tribal areas, women are less likely to pay for identity cards or register to vote. NADRA now has 58 million voter-eligible names on its list of new identity card holders.  Commission/NADRA Data Merger? -----------------------------  8. (C) Senior government officials are now responding to what Chief Election Commissioner Qazi Mohammed Farooq admitted to A/S Boucher on June 13 that unless at least 10 million more voters are added to the draft voter lists, the general elections will not be credible.  Last week, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz requested that the Commission provide him with a status report on the draft voter rolls.  The Deputy Chief of Mission confirmed the Prime Minister's interest in addressing the list problem in meetings with both Tariq Aziz, the President's Chief of Staff, and NADRA Chairman Salee Ahmed Moeen.  In a subsequent meeting, Aziz promised the Deputy Chief of Mission immediate access to the Commission to discuss the issue.  9. (C) Moeen told the Charge that if the Commission requested assistance, NADRA could merge its list with that of the Commission.  IFES technical experts confirm that this is possible and could result in an increase of 12-22 million names on the voter list.  The Commission is unlikely to request help without political pressure, so post is quietly engaged in efforts to convince the PM/President's office to press for efforts to increase the voter rolls, and to obtain the buy-in of international donors for this effort.  10. (C) We are still awaiting estimated merger costs, which would have to be negotiated, from NADRA.  It is unclear if the government would be willing to pay for the merger, but we understand that Japan may consider assisting this effort. Post also pressed government officials to increase voter rolls by subsidizing the costs of issuing new identity cards.  Comment -------  11. (C) Convincing the Commission to increase voter rolls enough to meet both domestic and international standards of credibility will be only the first step in helping Pakistan conduct free, fair and transparent elections.  Despite concerns about the capability of the Commission to deliver, we believe that USAID/IFES efforts have already made a positive contribution to what will be improved, but still imperfect, elections in Pakistan this year. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2866", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/6/2007 8:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002950  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/OMA DHAVILAND AND EB/ESC LLAMBERT USAID FOR ANE MWARD TREASURY FOR SSEGAL, PDERGARABEDIAN AND ASHARMA COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA JUSTICE FOR LSAMUEL MANILA PASS USED AT ADB WARSAW FOR RSEAMAN ABU DHABI FOR BMULLINAX  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/06/2017 TAGS: KTFN, EFIN, PTER, ECON, PREL, PK SUBJECT: HIGH-LEVEL APG DELEGATION EXPRESSES CONCERN TO GOP OVER LACK OF PROGRESS ON AML LEGISLATION  REF: ISLAMABAD 2866  Classified By: Ambassador Anne Patterson for Reasons 1.4(b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  A high-level delegation of the Asia-Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG), a regional subsidiary of FATF, traveled to Pakistan on July 2-3 to gage the country's progress on passing Anti-Money Laundering (AML) legislation, and to send a message that quick movement was necessary in order to prevent Pakistan from being subject to eventual disciplinary action.  While the delegation met with a range of GOP officials, they were not met at a particularly high level, and they were unable to meet with the Prime Minister or Financial Advisor Salman Shah.  Their agenda was changed at the last minute to remove meetings with any member of the Standing Committee on Finance, which has been considering the AML bill for the past two years.  Meetings with the Commissioner of the Pakistan Securities and Exchange Commission and Foreign Ministry were particularly tense, as neither saw any urgency to passing the legislation.  It is likely, as an initial step, that, at the next meeting of the APG in Perth on July 23, Pakistan will not be allowed to assume a seat on the Group's steering committee, which it is scheduled to do based on an alphabetic rotation.  While it is unlikely that Pakistan will be barred from the group at this point, it will face more intense scrutiny, perhaps monthly evaluations.  End Summary.  2.  (C) In two days of meetings, the APG high level delegation -- consisting of Dr. Yunus Husein, APG Co-Chair; Djoko Kurnijanto, Indonesian Financial Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre; Gordon Hook, Executive Secretary, APG Secretariat; Stuart Hughes, Canadian High Commission;  SIPDIS Vincente Aquino, Executive Director, Anti-Money Laundering Council; and Ian Knight, Deputy Secretary, APG Secretariat -- met with Major General (R) Mohammed Siddique, Acting Chairman of the National Accountability Board; Dr. Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan (via video-link from Karachi); Commissioner Razi-ur-Rahman of the Pakistan Securities and Exchange Commission; Additional Secretary Haider at the MFA; Secretary Mansoor Ahmed of the Law Ministry; and Nawid Ahson, Secretary General, Ministry of Finance.  The team was originally scheduled to meet with members of the National Assembly's Standing Committee on Finance, but this appointment was canceled with no explanation.  (Note: as Committee member Piracha (reftel) was unaware of the possible sanctions the APG could impose, such a meeting with the lawmakers might have proven useful.  End Note)  They had requested to meet with Finance Advisor to the Prime Minister Salman Shah and the Prime Minister, but were unable to do so.  3.  (C) The delegation concluded that the State Bank's Dr. Akhtar and Chairman Aziz of the NAB were the only two of their interlocutors who were committed to the swift passage of the AML legislation.  They met particular resistance from the PSEC Commissioner Rehman, who did not see why he should be involved at all, even though he regulates all non-bank financial institutions, and from MFA Additional Secretary Haider, who said that if Pakistan were removed from the APG, they could expect much less cooperation in the future on fighting the war on terror.  He claimed that the West has not lived up to its end of the bargain in terms of providing  ISLAMABAD 00002950  002 OF 002   technical cooperation in the broader GWOT.  4.  (C) The were told by the Ministry of Finance that the Standing Committee had finished reviewing the draft legislation in May, but had requested a smaller sub-committee be formed to ensure that all the comments were reflected in appropriate legally correct language.  The sub-committee had yet to meet, however, and the MOF predicted that they would need at least one month to finalize the legislation.  No timetable for presentation to the full National Assembly was given.  Hook asked for a copy of the terms of reference for the sub-committee, but was not given any indication that they existed.  5.  (C)  The delegation said it had sent an \"uncompromising message\", but in the spirit of friendly cooperation.  It is clear that they are losing patience with Pakistan, which has been a member of the APG since 2000.  It finished a draft bill in 2002, but there has been no concrete progress since then, as the bill has languished with the Standing Committee of the National Assembly for almost two years.  The team was not particularly concerned with the wording of the draft bill, as their feeling was that the legislation could be amended in the future if necessary.  Hook did note that, under the draft legislation, the military (which owns one of the largest banks in Pakistan) is entirely exempt from inclusion in the AML legislation.  He did express concern that the NAB's corruption function would remain unchanged, and, as the NAB was created by a Presidential ordinance and reports directly to the President, the President could theoretically dissolve it if its findings were not to his liking.  Hook also compared Pakistan unfavorably with India, which had made great strides in its legislation and enforcement.  Aquino of the Philippines recounted the comprehensive steps his country had taken to become compliant after being notified that it was on the list of non-cooperative countries.  6. (C) The APG will next meet in Perth the week of July 23. While no formal sanctions will be taken against Pakistan at that time, according to Hook, it is likely that Pakistan will be dis-invited to be a member of the steering committee, on which it is scheduled to sit based on alphabetic rotation. GOP officials indicated to the delegation that they would be sending many more than their usual number of delegates to Perth, but did not directly acknowledge that this was in response to concerns about the stagnant AML legislation. According to Hook, initially it is probable that Pakistan will be put under a schedule of stricter monitoring, perhaps monthly.  7.  (C) Comment:  If it was Pakistan's intent to reassure the APG that it was taking its membership commitments seriously, it obviously failed in that effort.  There appears to be no high-level commitment or coordinated strategy in place to pass the legislation, a critical element for progress here. It was unfortunate that the delegation was unable to meet with the Prime Minister, but understandable given the breaking events at the Red Mosque at the time of their appointment request.  The Ambassador plans to raise the lack of progress on the AML bill with the Prime Minister during her introductory courtesy call.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2934", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/6/2007 12:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 002954  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DS/ITA DS/IP/SCA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/06/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PTER, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: ATTACK ON MUSHARRAF / RED MOSQUE STANDOFF CONTINUES  REF: ISLAMABAD 2934 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  Government sources confidentially confirmed that a rocket was fired at President Musharraf's airplane at Chaklala Air Base this morning; the Pakistan Army continues to publicly deny the attack took place.  Security forces and militants at the Red Mosque continue to exchange sporadic fire, and mosque leader Abdul Rashid Ghazi refuses to surrender.  End Summary.  Attack on Musharraf's Airplane ------------------------------  2.  (C) Despite Pakistan Army denials, confidential government sources confirmed that on July 6 a rocket was fired at a plane carrying President Musharraf on the runway at Chaklala air base near Rawalpindi.  Musharraf was on his way to Turbat, Balochistan to survey damage from recent flooding.  In addition, local media reported authorities recovered three anti-aircraft guns and 25 cartridges from the roof of a residence near the air base.  See detailed reporting in other channels.  Red Mosque Update -----------------  3.  (U) As of 1600 local time on July 6, security forces and militants at the Red Mosque continue to exchange sporadic fire.  Several people have been injured in the fighting; no additional deaths have been confirmed. During the heaviest exchanges overnight, rocket fire from militants damaged an armored personnel carrier, and shelling from security forces breached a wall of the mosque.  4.  (U) Militant mosque leader Abdul Rashid Ghazi continued to refuse to surrender unconditionally and repeated militant threats during his July 6 Friday sermon inside the Red Mosque. Government forces continue to offer amnesty to those who surrender unconditionally, but only seven additional occupants surrendered on July 6.  A strict curfew is still in effect in Islamabad's G-6 sector. Interior Minister Sherpao said only 50 to 60 hardened terrorists remain inside the mosque as well as some women and children.  The National Crisis Management Cell sent ambulances to offer medical care to those inside and to remove any bodies from the mosque. The area remains off-limits to Embassy personnel.  Islamabad continues to remain calm, and Embassy operations continue at a normal pace.  All Mission staff are safe and accounted for.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/7/2007 8:22", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002960  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DS/ITA DS/IP/SCA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE -- SITREP JULY 7, NOON LOCAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 2954 AND PREVIOUS  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The strict curfew in the area around the Lal Masjid (Red Mosque) remains in effect as of noon on Saturday, July 7.  Gunfire and explosions continued intermittently overnight.  After a several-hour lull Saturday morning, sporadic exchange of fire resumed.  The rest of Islamabad continues to operate as normal.  All Mission staff are safe and accounted for.  Investigations continue into the circumstances surrounding the shots fired at one of Pakistan's presidential aircraft July 6.  END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) Explosions in the vicinity of the Red Mosque occurred around 19:00 Friday and again at around 01:00 Saturday morning.  Gunfire continued intermittently overnight.  Government forces may have blasted gaps in the mosque's perimeter walls to facilitate the escape of occupants who want to surrender.  After a several-hour lull July 7 morning, sporadic exchange of fire resumed.  3. (SBU) On Friday evening July 6, the Interior Ministry gave official figures of 19 dead and 98 injured so far as a result of the confrontation.  Authorities on the scene have not shared updated information regarding any casualties at the scene overnight.  The Ministry also reported 1,221 people had surrendered (795 men and 426 women) as of Friday evening. The pace of surrenders slowed on July 6, with estimates ranging from 13 to 20 people coming out of the Red Mosque. Government sources have issued no new information regarding the number of militants and others who remain in the mosque.  4. (SBU) The government appears to be maintaining steady pressure on the Red Mosque to force the unconditional surrender of extremist cleric Abdul Rashid Ghazi and his militant cohort.  Water, gas and electricity to the mosque remain cut.  Political, religious and civil society leaders have galvanized to put pressure on Ghazi to release women and children who remain in the Red Mosque against their will.  5. (SBU) RSO confirms that the strict curfew in Islamabad's G-6 sector remains in effect.  All Mission staff are safe and accounted for.  The 16 personnel whose residences are located in G-6 continue to stay at colleagues' houses.  Businesses are operating normally in the rest of the capital.  6. (U) Police have recovered shell casings from the machine gun used to fire shots at one of the Pakistani presidential aircraft July 6.  Police have arrested two people in connection with the incident.  The aircraft was not hit by gunfire and President Musharraf continued on his journey to visit flood-affected areas in Turbat.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2960", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/9/2007 11:01", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002976  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE - SITREP JULY 9, 1600 LOCAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 2960 AND PREVIOUS  1.  (SBU) Summary:  There has been no major change in the Red Mosque situation since Post's July 7 report (reftel), but the government appears to be preparing for a final siege. Security forces and militants exchanged sporadic gunfire on July 8 and 9, and mosque leader Ghazi continues to refuse to surrender.  All Mission staff are safe and accounted for, and except for the G6 sector, which remains under curfew, the city is operating normally.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU) Media reported that on Sunday President Musharraf issued a go-ahead order for security forces to \"act decisively.\"  Government sources notified post that a major operation would take place Sunday night, but a plan to storm the girls' dorm next to the mosque was stopped when security forces discovered it was booby-trapped.  The Army continues to conduct aerial surveillance of the mosque.  Militants fatally shot a Pakistan Special Forces Commander during an abortive raid attempt by authorities on Sunday morning, and later on the same day several militants were arrested while trying to escape the mosque.  3.  (SBU) Groups of religious leaders continue to urge Ghazi to release women and children still inside the compound. Select religious leaders who recently met with Ghazi will see Prime Minister Aziz today.  Washington may wish to review reporting in other channels.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/9/2007 11:35", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 002979  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: TBIO, PTER, TSPL, ETTC, PK SUBJECT: BIOSECURITY ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM HELPS STRENGTHEN S&T COLLABORATION IN PAKISTAN  ISLAMABAD 00002979  001.2 OF 002   1. (SBU) Summary: The Biosecurity Engagement Program team's second visit to Pakistan June 12-23 further strengthened the collaboration on the Science and Technology Agreement, part of the Strategic Dialogue between Pakistan and the U.S.  The team met with high-level GOP officials and various members of Pakistan's scientific community over the two-week visit which included four bio-safety and security workshops that trained over 700 scientists and lab workers.  Each meeting elicited common needs from various sectors of the scientific community, as well as concerns that there had been little movement on the S&T dialogue since the first high-level committee meeting in Washington in February. The team hopes to establish a program office in Islamabad in order to move quickly on funding programs to build Pakistan's bio-safety and security capacity.  End Summary  24 MEETINGS AND 4 WORKSHOPS IN 8 DAYS ----------------------------------  2.  (U) On June 12, Jason Rao and Kendra Chittenden from ISN/CTR, Martha Mummey and Muquarrab Qureshi from USDA, and Steven Clark from EPA began a whirlwind round of meetings with representatives from the Ministries of Health (MOH), Environment, Science and Technology (MOST), and Food, Agriculture and Livestock (MINFAL).  In addition, they met with scientists from Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC); Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR); Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR).  In Lahore they met with the Centers for Excellence in Microbiology; King Edward Medical University; University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences; Institute of Public Health; Veterinary Research Institute and Aga Khan University in Karachi.  3.  (U) The Biosecurity Engagement Program (BEP) team was joined by Reynolds Salerno of Sandia National Labs, Robert Hawley of the American Biological Safety Association, and Joseph Kozlovac of USDA to conduct bio-safety and security workshops from June 18 to 21. Over 700 scientists and lab workers attended the four separate workshops conducted in Islamabad and Karachi. Participation was lively, the questions insightful, and all agreed the workshops were a success.  LABS IN DESPERATE NEED OF TRAINING AND EQUIPMENT --------------------------------------------- ---  4.  (SBU) The BEP team was able to visit several labs, most of which were inadequately handling the deadly pathogens housed there.  The tuberculosis lab at King Edward Medical University contained multi-drug resistant (MDR) tuberculosis virus that was being handled without proper bio-safety techniques, such as gloves, masks and lab coats.  The situation at the Veterinary Research Institute (VRI) was slightly better.  VRI produces 21 different animal vaccines, including H5N1 (the most highly-pathogenic variant of avian influenza) and anthrax.  Even though they have bio-safety level two (BSL2) capabilities, it is still considered inadequate given the toxicity of the pathogens housed there.  The BEP team invited representatives from each of these labs to the workshops and donated personal protective equipment (PPE) to the lab at King Edward Medical University.  COMMON THEMES -------------  5.  (SBU) There were four common themes that ran through the meetings with both government and science representatives:  -- Training - every Ministry and scientific institution said it was critical that Pakistani scientists have the ability to train for three to six months at labs in the U.S., in addition to bringing U.S. scientists to Pakistan to lecture students and train lab personnel.  -- Guidance - government representatives and the scientific  ISLAMABAD 00002979  002.2 OF 002   community requested help in drafting appropriate laws, lab protocols, bio-safety guidelines, and designing BSL3 labs.  -- Capacity building - everyone the team met with requested help with capacity building.  This includes infrastructure, such as better water and sewer pipes to prevent the contamination of drinking water, and lab equipment.  -- Public/private partnerships - the scientific community was very aware that the government cannot provide for all their needs and that the key is to build partnerships with corporations with an interest in developing Pakistan as an outsourcing market for research, development and production.  PAKISTAN CONCERNED OVER PACE OF PROGRESS -----------------------------------------  6.  (SBU) During meetings with officials from MOH, MOST and MINFAL, concerns were raised at the pace of progress in the S&T dialogue. The Pakistanis believed they had presented several areas of potential collaboration that were still awaiting U.S. response.  Rao highlighted the work his team had done in training lab workers, and the fact that he had brought a water expert, Clark, to consult with PCRWR on ways to improve Pakistan's drinking water, fulfilling the agreement for training and collaboration.  During the discussion of next steps, each Ministry requested assistance from the U.S. with road maps and time tables.  COMMENT -------  7.  (SBU) It was clear from the meetings that the GOP and the Pakistani scientific community have high hopes for the S&T dialogue; however they have concerns about the pace of progress.  Although the BEP team does not technically fall under the S&T dialogue agreement, the work they are doing is furthering scientific collaboration and exchange.  Rao intends to explore the possibility of establishing a program office in Islamabad in order to facilitate funding of projects which meet BEP goals in Pakistan. Post will work closely with Rao on this project in addition to highlighting areas where the S&T dialogue is progressing.  End Comment  Patterson " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/10/2007 1:29", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002980  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  STATE FOR EB/TPP/BTA/ANA MBGOODMAN USTR FOR DHARTWICK USAID FOR ANE MWARD  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, EIND, ELAB, ETRD, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN RAISES CONCERNS OVER PROPOSED ROZ LEGISLATION  1.  (SBU) Summary:  On July 9, EconCouns met with Jamshid Khan, Joint Secretary and Raheela Tajwar, Deputy Secretary in the Ministry of Commerce in the Ministry of Commerce to discuss Pakistan's concerns over proposed ROZ legislation. Some concerns were resolved by discussing the wording in the document; however, the textile issue continues to be raised by Pakistan. End Summary.  2.  (SBU) On July 9, EconCouns met with Jamshid Khan and Raheela Tajwar from the Ministry of Commerce to discuss the proposed ROZ legislation.  Khan was concerned about eligibility requirements mentioned in the document, as well as designations.  EconCouns pointed to the language in the document under \"Eligibility\" that states, \"... or are making continual progress toward establishing...\" to reassure Khan that Pakistan did not have to have all legislation in place before the ROZs could be established. Similarly, EconCouns highlighted the wording, \"...could take the following into account...\" under the \"Designation\" section to ease concerns over which areas in Pakistan would qualify for ROZ designation.  3.  (SBU) Textile limitations continued to be a big concern to Khan and Tajwar, specifically categories 338 and 339 (Knit Shirts and Blouses).  Tajwar pointed out only five to six of the 50 items in those categories were permitted to be exported under the ROZ agreement.  Khan stated that Pakistan's expertise was in textile production, and that if textile manufacturers were not permitted a greater range of exports, they would not relocate to a ROZ because the cost would not be worth the benefit, and the ROZ concept would not be successful.  Khan pointed out the idea of the ROZ is to combat terrorism, so the legislation should not be focused on things such as rules of origin.  He stated that the MOU Pakistan has with China would keep Chinese textiles out of the ROZs.  4.  (SBU) Comment:  As expected, the textile issue has raised its head once again.  While the Pakistanis state they understand the political sensitivities involved with this issue in the U.S., they are still insistent that a broader range of textiles be permitted in the ROZs.  Post has emphasized the need for a broad range of non-textile products to be included to encourage expansion of businesses already operating in the FATA and other potential ROZ locations.  End Comment.  Patterson " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2976", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/10/2007 5:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 002990  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  FOR DS/IP/ITA, DS/IP/SCA  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE SITREP AND EAC -- JULY 10, 11:00 LOCAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 2976 AND PREVIOUS  1. (SBU) Summary: Overnight on July 9, the Pakistani government escalated its operation against the Red Mosque. A high-level delegation tried to negotiate with militant leader Maulana Ghazi on July 9. The negotiations failed and the military operation resumed at 04:00 July 10. As of 11:00 local, fighting between the security forces and the militants continues. The strict curfew in Islamabad's G-6 sector surrounding the Red Mosque is still in effect. Post convened an Emergency Action Committee to review the current security situation and consurred with the current post security posture that restricts all personnel from the G-6 sector of Islamabad. All Mission staff are safe and accounted for. End Summary.  2. (SBU) On the evening of July 9, ruling Pakistan Muslim League president Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain led a high-level delegation of religious leaders, politicians, and humanitarians in an effort to negotiate with the Red Mosque militants. The delegation pressed Maulana Ghazi to release the innocent women and children inside the mosque. They offered him various means of surrender, including guaranteeing him house arrest. The negotiators were not able to enter the Red Mosque because of security concerns, and carried out negotiations via cell phones and megaphones outside the mosque. The militants refused to surrender and the negotiations broke down in the middle of the night.  3. (SBU) After a final ultimatum to surrender, security forces launched a renewed attack against the Red Mosque at 04:00 local time. As a result of the offensive, 60 percent of the Red Mosque compound was secure as of 11:00 local, according to a military spokesman. Twenty children escaped from the mosque compound during the operation. Over 50 militants have been reported killed and many more injured in the July 10 offensive. Four members of the security forces have also been killed.  Militants have used rocket launchers and small weapons against the security forces.  4. (SBU) Post convened an Emergency Action Committee (EAC) morning of July 10 to review the security situation. The government's strict curfew in the area around the Red Mosque (G-6) remained in effect on July 10. The EAC concurred with the current post security posture that restricts all personnel from G-6 sector. All Mission personnel are safe and have been accounted for. The Embassy is fully operational and businesses in the capital are operating normally.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2990", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/11/2007 11:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003022  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/11/2017 TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE SITREP -- JULY 11, 1630 LOCAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 2990 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (U) Summary: The military operation launched against the Red Mosque at 0400 on July 10 continued for over 30 hours until 1030 on July 11. As of 1630, security forces continue to do a room-by-room search of the mosque compound but are no longer facing armed resistance. Militant cleric Abdul Rashid Ghazi was killed in the military operation, and the government is making arrangements for his burial. The strict curfew in Islamabad's G-6 sector surrounding the Red Mosque remains in effect. All Mission staff are safe and accounted for. End Summary.  2. (SBU) The 30-plus hour operation -- dubbed Operation Silence -- continued throughout the night of July 10 until approximately 1030 on July 11. The operation involved heavy shelling, grenades, and intense fighting. The security forces breached the complex and found parts of it booby-trapped. The heaviest fighting took place in the mosque's labyrinth basement and underground tunnels, where well-armed militants resisted the security forces for several hours. Militant cleric Abdul Rashid Ghazi was killed during this heavy firefight and his body was found in the basement of the compound. At approximately 1030 on July 11, the militant resistance ended and the security forces began a process of \"search and comb\" throughout the compound to remove all militants, bodies, and weapons. This \"search and comb\" mission will likely continue through the night, according to military spokesmen.  3. (SBU) In a July 11 press conference, military spokesman Maj. Gen. Waheed Arshad announced that 10 soldiers had been killed and 33 wounded in the overall operation. He also said that 86 militants surrendered during the operation and 30 women and children were rescued. The military would not release the official number of militant or civilian casualties until the \"search and comb\" mission was complete. Press reports indicate that 55 militants were killed in Operation Silence. The military also promised journalists a chance to visit the Red Mosque compound on July 12. Hundreds of ambulances moved the dead and injured to hospitals in Islamabad and Rawalpindi. These hospitals have been closed to journalists.  4. (C) On July 11, ruling Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain spoke to the Ambassador about his negotiations with the Red Mosque leaders. Shujaat was surprised by the presence of foreign fighters within the mosque and said that the actual casualty numbers were much higher than being reported. He said that Interior Minister Sherpao was making arrangements to fly Abdul Rashid Ghazi's body to his ancestral village of Rojhan, Punjab for burial.  5. (SBU) On July 11, the religious party alliance Majlis Muttahida-e-Amal (MMA) sponsored demonstrations against the operation in some cities in NWFP, Balochistan, and Punjab. MMA leaders publicly blame the loss of lives on the government for not continuing the July 10 negotiations. On July 10, armed madrassa students ransacked the tent offices of Save the Children- USA, CARE International, and the French Red Crescent in Battagram, NWFP in protest of the operation. There were no reported casualties.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1647|07ISLAMABAD2270|07ISLAMABAD2468|07ISLAMABAD897", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/12/2007 7:41", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 003027  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/11/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PINS, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE RED MOSQUE OPERATION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 2468      B. ISLAMABAD 2270      C. ISLAMABAD 1647      D. ISLAMABAD 897  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary.  President Musharraf's decision to take military action against the Red Mosque removes a long-festering cell of extremism in Pakistan's capital. Although criticized for being \"soft\" on extremists, the government's delayed response reflected concern about keeping civilian casualties to a minimum and limiting negative consequences, especially in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  Media reports of secret burials to hide the real casualty figures could erode what was widespread public support for action.  Religious parties and extremists have responded with so far limited demonstrations and attacks tied to the Mosque action. Al Qaeda's Zawahari has called for jihad against the government, which should stiffen government resolve for further action against extremists.  2. (C) Summary continued.  The crisis exposed popular discontent with the government's ability to deliver basic services and law and order, even in the capital.  The Red Mosque offered what the government often did not provide -- a safe haven for earthquake and rape victims, action to shut down brothels, and dispute resolution that conformed with the conservative (but not extremist) views of many Pakistanis. The militant's ability to hijack the Mosque's populist agenda also demonstrates how talibanization is spreading from the FATA to the NWFP.  Musharraf is due to address the nation on the crisis; the question now is how quickly he will move to take further action against creeping talibanization.  End Summary.  Entrenched Extremism and a Populist Agenda ------------------------------------------  3. (C) The Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) and its associated madrassas have been increasingly extremist since the 1980's when President Zia ul-Haq patronized the mosque and its previous leader Maulana Abdullah to encourage young Pakistanis to join the jihad against the Soviets.  Maulana Abdullah's sons, Abdur Rashid Ghazi and Abdul Aziz, continued his firebrand tradition, and throughout the 1990's the mosque openly claimed ties to the Taliban and Al-Qaeda.  After 9/11, the Red Mosque became increasingly isolated by mainstream religious leaders, religious political parties, and other madrassas.  It also became the natural haven for militants from a host of banned extremist groups, such as Sipah-e-Sabah and Jaish-e-Muhammad. Videos and paraphernalia supporting Al-Qaeda in Iraq and other terrorist organizations were openly available inside the mosque.  4. (C) Concurrently, the Red Mosque was developing a populist agenda by playing to the concerns of working- and lower-class communities who seldom receive adequate government services or effective justice.  Neighbors, who had repeatedly petitioned the police to close a known brothel, asked the Red Mosque to intervene.  The mosque provided a safe haven for the destitute, including earthquake and rape victims, often ignored by the government.  It offered the services of its \"Sharia court\" as a form of informal alternative dispute resolution to those frustrated by an ineffective justice system.  The mosque's literature is highly populist in nature, calling for the rights of the underprivileged, relief for the homeless, rights for prisoners, and universal health care.  5. (C) Since January 2007, the self-styled Red Mosque \"brigade\" periodically kidnapped brothel owners, policemen, and foreign masseuses.  Militants in the guise of students were often seen chanting jihadist slogans outside the mosque, intimidating local CD shop owners, and occupying government property.  These provocative and illegal actions occurred every few weeks and were resolved through negotiations with the government.  Though it was widely known that the Red Mosque had a cache of heavy weaponry, the brigade had not used lethal force prior to July 3.  6. (C) Pakistani security officials have exercised restraint  ISLAMABAD 00003027  002 OF 003   since January due to the presence of women and children in the mosque.  This controlled response -- a combination of negotiations and a display of force -- was enough to keep the Red Mosque quiet for a few weeks each time.  However, the repeated transgressions of the Red Mosque brigade frustrated both the public and government officials.  The June 23 kidnapping of five Chinese massage parlor workers, which occurred on the eve of the Interior Minister's trip to Beijing, appears to have focused plans for action.  Violence began when militants inside the mosque fired on policemen who were erecting barbed wire barriers around the mosque to contain further Red Mosque brigade actions.  7. (S/NF) For the operation against the Red Mosque, the government deployed its best-trained special operations forces, including troops with hostage rescue training, in order to minimize casualties.  The 30-hour length of the final operation surprised most observers who had not expected the tenacity of the militants and the extent of their weaponry.  8.  (C)  The government took unprecedented steps (daily briefings, hotlines) to keep the media and public informed during the crisis.  However, media reports of secret burials to hide the final casualty figures could quickly undermine government credibility and erode what had been widespread public support for military action. How the government handles Ghazi's funeral will also affect public opinion in the NWFP.   Who was inside the mosque? --------------------------  9. (C) Militants: The last holdouts within the mosque included approximately 100 well-trained, well-armed terrorists.  The militants were reported to come from various banned terrorist organizations in Kashmir and in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), including Sipah-e-Sabah, Jaish-e-Muhammad, and Lashkar-e-Jangvi.  They were also responsible for bringing weapons inside the Red Mosque.  10. (C) Students: The Red Mosque has two associated madrassas Jamia Hafsa for females and Jamia Faridia (attached to the nearby Faisal Mosque) for males.  Most of the approximately 7,000 enrolled students came from conservative families in the NWFP.  From media interviews, it was clear that male and female students had been indoctrinated to enlist their participation in the violence.  Many of the students -- both male and female -- participated in the violence.  The majority of the 3,000 to 5,000 people in the mosque who surrendered were students; most were remanded to their parents' or NGO custody.  11. (C) The Destitute: The Red Mosque had also become a safe haven for many widows and orphans from areas affected by Pakistan's October 2005 earthquake.  The mosque also supported several rape victims and other women who had been shunned by their families. Many of these victims were released to the custody of NGOs.  Initial public sympathy for the Red Mosque resulted partly from its aid to the destitute, but the use of such victims as bargaining chips in the final operation angered the public.  Talibanization --------------  12. (C) Internationally, the media has focused on the Red Mosque as the prime example of the Pakistan's talibanization; however, the mosque has had mixed success on the ground.  It certainly did not convert relatively liberal Islamabad to its extremist perspective.  Even the staunchest Islamist parties, including the Jamaat-e-Islaami and the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, denounced the mosque's actions and distanced themselves from its leaders.  The Deobandi madrassa accreditation board, Wafaqul Madaris, pulled the accreditation of the Red Mosque's associated seminaries in March 2007.  Hard-line madrassas participated with the government in negotiations with Mosque leaders during the crisis.  13. (C) Most Pakistanis are religiously conservative but  ISLAMABAD 00003027  003 OF 003   moderate.  While they may sympathize with the Red Mosque leaders' accusations that the government is corrupt and un-Islamic, they oppose violent action.  According to Pakistan national television's cell-phone poll (released July 6), 80 percent of the 5,300 respondents supported the government's handling of the situation.  Bilqees Edhi, the co-founder of the Edhi Foundation (Pakistan's largest and most-respected NGO) condemned the Red Mosque leaders.  She called the behavior of Ghazi and Abdul Aziz \"the greatest dishonor of Islam and the country and its history.\" The main criticism that urban and elite Pakistanis share is that the government waited too long to act.  14. (C) In some remote areas of the country and within other radical madrassas, particularly in NWFP and Balochistan, there is sympathy for the militants' willingness to stand up to what they see as corrupt, ineffective local and central government.  Since the initiation of military operations on July 3, there have been a number of demonstrations and attacks on NGOs in support of the Red Mosque, primarily by madrassa students in towns across the NWFP and Balochistan. After the operation, religious parties criticized the government's actions, probably to gain political points among conservative Red Mosque sympathizers.  The death toll from the military operation will likely be used by extremist groups, such as Tehreek-i Nafaz-i Shariat-i Mohammadi (TNSM), to justify further terrorist attacks in the NWFP.  Al Qaeda's Zawahari July 12 issued a video condemning the attack and calling for jihad against Pakistan.  The Wafaqul Madaris, which represents 17,000 madrassas, announced nationwide protests.  15. (C) Pakistan witnessed vigilante tactics like those in remote areas well before the Red Mosque brigade became active in January 2007. Pakistan's security forces have not yet been able to enforce law and order in these areas.  The presence of jihadi-trained extremists within the Red Mosque also highlights the ease with which such elements can travel from the FATA and Kashmir to Islamabad and other cities.  16.  (C)  Concerned about negative reactions to the Mosque operation, including the death of Maulana Abdur Rashid Ghazi, the government July 11 announced a nation-wide security alert that includes increased police presence in sensitive areas and more security checkpoints.  Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz announced in a special cabinet session that madrassas country-wide would be investigated to conform with Pakistani laws, especially those banning weapons.   Short and Long Term Effects ---------------------------  17. (C) Comment: Most Pakistanis supported President Musharraf's handling of the crisis, although reports of a cover-up over casualties could quickly erode that support. Musharraf's reluctance to act quickly against the Mosque leaders ultimately allowed the militants time to alienate the general public and build support for a military response.  At a time when the military was facing increasing criticism, it was able to demonstrate a continued capacity for decisive action. In comparison, the political opposition was ineffective in either criticizing the government or offering solutions, which may marginally help the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party in upcoming parliamentary elections.  18. (C) In the longer term, the government faces the specter of creeping talibanization by militants who capitalize on public discontent with the government's inability to deliver basic services and law and order.  Musharraf now plans to take action against the spread of talibanization in the NWFP and extremism elsewhere in the country; implementing his plan will require substantial military and economic development resources.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3022", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/12/2007 9:52", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003028  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/12/2017 TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE SITREP -- JULY 12, 1300 LOCAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 3022 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (SBU) Summary: Security forces continue to sweep the Red Mosque for any remaining weapons, but military operations are complete. The military has still not allowed journalists or other observers to the site of the Red Mosque as of 1300 July 12. The media is reporting 287 people killed in \"Operation Silence\", as well as a cover-up to secretly bury many of the bodies. This figure far exceeds the official military announcement of 73 killed. Religious parties and extremists continue to condemn the operation and have called for country-wide protests on July 13. The curfew remains in effect in Islamabad's G-6 sector. All Mission staff are safe and accounted for. End Summary.  2. (C) Confusion continues (and probably will continue) as to a definitive death toll. As clean-up operations are coming to a close, the military has announced 73 militants and 10 security forces killed during \"Operation Silence\". In contrast, there are wide-spread press reports claiming 287 deaths. Local television and newspapers have reported pictures and details about 100-foot long mass graves being dug on the outskirts of Islamabad. The press is detailing cold-storage of the bodies, funeral arrangements, and a refusal to share information with families. Senior police sources confirm 287 bodies, mostly adult males. Family members of the deceased remain at the Red Mosque looking for bodies. As of 1300, the military has not made any public statements about the alleged burials.  3. (U) Militant cleric Abdul Rashid Ghazi was buried today in his ancestral village of Rojhan, Punjab. The televised funeral was attended by family members (including his brother Maulana Abdul Aziz) and many local people.  4. (U) The largest Deobandi seminary accreditation board, Wafaqul Madaris, has called for country-wide demonstrations against \"Operation Silence\" on July 13. Wafaqul Madaris had negotiated on behalf of the government in the Red Mosque crisis, but they are now protesting the ultimate use of force. In a video statement, Al-Qaeda's deputy leader Ayman al-Zawahiri called for jihad in Pakistan in retaliation for the Red Mosque operation.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3030", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/12/2007 10:04", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003030  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: STRENGTHENING SUPPORT FOR PAKISTAN'S ELECTIONS  REF: Islamabad 2944  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Pakistan's general elections are expected to take place in late 2007 or early 2008, and Post has been working with stakeholders, donors and the Pakistan Election Commission since 2005 to strengthen the process.  This cable outlines current US and international donor projects underway and proposes the $5 million in 2007 Supplemental Funds targeted for Pakistan's elections be spent on an elections observer mission and poll-watcher training for political parties.   End Summary  --------------------------------------- USAID-funded Bilateral Election Support ---------------------------------------  2. (U) USAID and Post began working with political parties, the Electoral Commission, donors, and other stakeholders in 2005 to determine what was most needed to prepare for the next round of general elections.  The following programs are the culmination of those consultations.   IFES ----  3. (U) Working through the International Foundation for Election Systems (IFES) with a USD 19 million contract, USAID is providing technical support to the Election Commission of Pakistan in its efforts to create and computerize new voter rolls. IFES is also purchasing transparent plastic ballot boxes for election day. IFES also manages a program to promote dialogue between the Election Commission and the major political parties on the electoral framework and on dispute resolution during the election period.  National Democratic Institute -----------------------------  4. (U) USAID has also supported the National Democratic Institute's (NDI) work in strengthening Pakistan's political parties since 2004 with a USD 1.7 million grant.  The program, scheduled to conclude in July, supports initiatives to modernize and democratize political parties, improve their internal governance structures and processes, and encourage the emergence of a new generation of party leaders. Training has focused on issues-based campaigning, candidate selection, member list management, and internal party elections. In its final months, the NDI program turned toward election-related activities, such as informing parties on how to get their members registered to vote and evaluating the voter registration process.  National Endowment for Democracy --------------------------------  5. (U) The National Endowment for Democracy provides funding to the International Republican Institute (IRI) to improve the capacity of political parties in Pakistan in advance of upcoming local and national elections. IRI's training program focuses on improving responsiveness to voters, internal communications, and media relations. Public polling -- developed in consultation with political parties -- comprises a significant aspect of IRI's activities. Polling results provide political parties with concrete data to allow them to focus their activities on voters' priorities.   ----------------------------- Multi-Donor Basket Activities -----------------------------  6. (U) USAID contributes to multi-donor basket activities, which include an Asia Foundation-managed program to support domestic election monitoring, voter education, and media training. US support will be USD 1.5 million in fiscal year 2007 for the overall USD 11.3 million project.  Other donors to this project include Canada, UK, Netherlands, Norway, and Switzerland.  7. (U) USAID also contributes to a basket-funded activity managed by the UN Development Program (UNDP) to train polling staff, support voter education, and provide other election commodities, such as transparent ballot boxes and voting screens. USAID's fiscal year 2007 contributions will be USD 1.5 million to an overall USD 27 million project. Other donors include the UK, Canada, EU, Japan, Norway, and the Netherlands.   ISLAMABAD 00003030  002 OF 002   8. (U) Other donors have limited their electoral support to the basket-funded activities as listed above. There are no other donors providing bilateral electoral assistance.  ------------------------------------- US Assistance: Delivering Dividends -------------------------------------  9. (SBU) The embedding of IFES in the Election Commission is already paying dividends.  With IFES' guidance, the Election Commission has streamlined its process for adding voters to the voters' list, issued clarifying instructions for registration, extended the voter roll display period, and is considering a computerized merger of Election Commission and National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) data bases to significantly expand the voters' list (reftel). The political parties are starting to identify concrete problems for the Election Commission's Complaints Department to fix.  Several parties are also actively reviewing voter lists and registering new voters.  10. (SBU) The cost of acquiring National Computerized Identity Cards that are required to register and vote has hindered women and some rural voters from registering.  Post is actively supporting pending Pakistani proposals to subsidize or provide free National Computerized Identity Cards. Some religious parties are now pushing registration of their women voters to counter similar secular party registration efforts.  ----------------------------- Projects for the Supplemental -----------------------------  11. (SBU) Post believes that the following activities would provide the highest-impact, practical, and substantive use of the USD 5 million in 2007 Supplemental Funds for Pakistan:  -- Observer Mission.  The government has welcomed international election observers, and Post is planning to deploy a Mission-wide monitoring team, as we did for the 2005 provincial elections.  A US-sponsored election mission would supplement this effort and provide an independent assessment on the key question of credibility.  Time, budget, and security constraints will require staffing a geographically restricted mission, but careful deployment to expected problem areas can maximize resources and impact.  The European Union also is planning a limited election observation mission, is enthusiastic about the possibility of US participation, and is open to working together to maximize a joint effort.  -- Party Poll-Watcher Training.  Previous election monitors have cited the problem of a systematic lack of awareness and training by political party workers deployed on election day. US support for party poll-watcher training would augment UNDP activities; Post believes that for such training to be effective, at least 50,000 political party observers would need to be trained.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/16/2007 11:44", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003084  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/16/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ASEC, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE AFTERMATH; DEMISE OF NORTH WAZIRISTAN AGREEMENT?   Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) Summary:  The Lal Masjid (Red Mosque) operation was a catalyst for implementation of this weekend's attacks on Pakistani security forces in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) and the FATA.  However, the attacks were primarily a tribal response to the growing re-deployment of government security forces in the area and are likely to continue. Despite the July 14 announcement by militants that the North Waziristan Agreement was dead, the government may try one more time to revive it.   End Summary.  Spate of Attacks in NWFP and FATA ---------------------------------  2. (C) On July 14 and 15, three suicide attacks, in North Waziristan, Dera Ismail Khan, and the Swat valley, left approximately 70 Pakistanis dead and 100 wounded, mostly security forces.  Authorities defused a large bomb in a busy marketplace in Peshawar on July 14, and rocket attacks against a Bannu-area military outpost and the Malakand University campus in Chakdara damaged buildings but resulted in no casualties.  3.  (C)  President Musharraf condemned the attacks and called for a cabinet meeting on July 16 to review plans for military operations in the NWFP and FATA.  In a nationwide speech July 12 to defend the Lal Masjid operation, Musharraf pledged to root out extremism and promised additional troops and equipment for the Frontier Corps.   Weak Political Protests Against Red Mosque Operation --------------------------------------------- -------  4.  (C) Over the weekend, political protests against the Lal Masjid operation were relatively weak.  On July 13, the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) coalition of religious parties organized small protests in Peshawar, Quetta, and Islamabad. However, on July 16, MMA leader Liaqat Baloch told PolOff the party was now shifting its focus back to the Chief Justice's case, Musharraf's uniform, and general elections.  Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto warned against any alleged efforts to delay elections because of the security situation.  There is continued press speculation about civilian casualties from the Lal Masjid operation as familles continue to wait for news on the whereabouts of students, some of whom remain in police custody.   End of the North Waziristan Agreement? --------------------------------------  5.  (C)  On July 14, Islamic militants (including Taliban members) announced the end of their ten-month old \"peace agreement\" with the government.  The September 2006 agreement had been brokered by a jirga of tribal leaders, and its main points called for government withdrawal from checkpoints in exchange for an end to attacks on Pakistani security forces, an end to cross-border movement of fighters for military operations in Afghanistan, and expulsion of foreign militants.  Both the government and the militants have claimed continuous violations of the agreement.  Militants have been claiming that the government broke that agreement after May re-deployments to checkpoints in Swat and North and South Waziristan.  6.  (C)  There have an ongoing series of militant attacks on security forces in North and South Waziristan since the May 22 Pakistani military attack on Zargarkhel and the June 19 and 23 NATO strikes on Datta Khel and Shawal.  Azmat Hanif, Secretary to NWFP Governor Ali Mohammed Jan Orakzai, said on  SIPDIS July 16 that the government could make one last effort to revive the North Waziristan Agreement, but that talks would be \"tough\" and include a charge sheet of militant violations (septel from Consulate Peshawar).  After months of working to delay or deter military operations, Orakzai may finally be willing to stop opposing military action.   7.  (C)  Comment:  While the Lal Masjid operation was  ISLAMABAD 00003084  002 OF 002   probably the catalyst for this weekend's attacks, growing tribal resentment at the Army's redeployment into the NWFP and FATA was--and remains--the root cause.  Therefore, we expect these attacks to continue.  It may be premature to announce the death of the government's North Waziristan Agreement.  With our without a formal pact, the government will want to keep lines of communication with the militants open in order to execute military operations with minimum casualties.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/18/2007 12:14", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003111  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/18/2017 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SUICIDE BOMBER TARGETS ISLAMABAD CHIEF JUSTICE RALLY  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: It is still too early to draw conclusions about the cause of the July 18 suicide bombing in Islamabad. The government's challenge will be to provide the increased security that opposition parties and the general public are demanding without imposing a state of emergency.  End Summary.  2. (SBU) A suicide bombing disrupted a rally in the F-8 neighborhood of Islamabad on the evening of July 18. Police sources reported that the bomber, who was unable to pass through the security check at the rally, detonated himself approximately 60 meters away from the rally, killing 19 people (11 of whom were police) and injuring 63.  3. (SBU) Suspended Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry was scheduled to address a crowd of Pakistan Bar Association members, Pakistan People's Party and Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz supporters. Although the media reported that most of those killed were Pakistan People's Party workers, a People's Party official told PolOff that five party members were killed and eight were wounded. The attack occurred before Chaudhry's arrival.  4. (U) President Musharraf immediately issued a statement comdemning the act, expressing condolences to the families of those killed, appealing to the public to remain calm, vigilant, and requesting the public assist authorities in tracking down those responsible for the act. Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao told reporters that the attack was the continuation of a series of terrorist attacks that have occurred in the wake of the Red Mosque operation and said that there was no possibility that the government would impose a state of emergency. The government has tightened security throughout Pakistan in response to the incident.  5. (U) In a particularly inflammatory statement, Aitzaz Ahsan, Chief Justice Chaudhry's lead counsel, blamed the attack on the government and said that the attack was a government attempt to \"eliminate\" the Chief Justice. The Pakistan People's Party Parliamentary Board, which was meeting with Chairperson Benazir Bhutto in London, issued a statement expressing apprehension that a \"hidden hand\" was creating anarchy in order impose a state of emergency and postpone elections.  6. (C) Speculation about the cause of the attack is already rife. Like the People's Party, some Pakistanis have been quick to blame the government for planning the attack so that President Musharraf can use the current spate of violence as an excuse to declare a state of emergency and postpone upcoming parliamentary elections (which will occur later this year or early next year). Others have attributed the blast as an act of revenge against the Pakistan People's Party for their support of the government's actions in the Lal Masjid operation. Still others -- particularly ethnic Pashtuns -- see the attack as a logical -- and uncontrollable -- extension of the violence already occurring in the Northwest Frontier Province and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  7. (C) Comment: It is still too early to draw firm conclusions about the cause of the July 18 suicide bombing in Islamabad, but the tactics (and other information) indicate it is most likely related to militant groups in the Pak-Afghan border area.  Like the infiltration of radicals into the Red Mosque, this is another troubling sign that the violence in the border area can spread.  The government's challenge will be to provide the increased security that opposition parties and the general public are demanding. End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/19/2007 14:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003128  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2017 TAGS: PTER, PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF TELLS EDITORS: IT IS MODERATES VS. EXTREMISTS; HE WILL SEEK RE-ELECTION IN UNIFORM   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: In a surprisingly wide ranging and confident interview with senior Pakistani editors July 18, President Musharraf flatly stated that Pakistan was in a direct confrontation with extremist forces and the biggest challenge was to stop the spread of Talibanization.  To win that fight required a \"unified\" civilian-military command; therefore, he will run for re-election as president, in uniform, before the current assemblies. He reviewed a military response but also reached out for media/civil society support.  Addressing the concerns of the political opposition, he pledged not to impose a state of emergency and to honor the constitution and hold \"free and fair\" elections when the current assemblies' term expires.  Opposition parties, which had vowed efforts to block Musharraf's re-election from the current assemblies, now face the challenge of how to respond.  End Summary.  2. (U) President Musharraf talked to a group of senior newspaper editors on July 18. While we have no transcript of the conversation, the media reported that Musharraf said:  -- We are in direct confrontation with extremist forces.  It is moderates vs. extremists. He appealed to moderates to support the government in this fight.  -- Pakistan's biggest challenge is to stop the spread of Talibanization.  -- Two full Pakistan Army divisions had been dispatched to the NWFP and FATA, and steps were underway to increase and strengthen local paramilitary forces.  -- He will not use the current violence as a pretext to impose a state of emergency.  -- Only a \"unified command\" of civilian and military leadership can defeat the extremists.  A civilian government alone cannot handle this military situation.  -- He will stand for re-election as president, without taking off his uniform (as Chief of Army Staff), before the current assemblies' terms expire.  -- Parliamentary elections will be free and fair, and they will be held on time - by early next year at the latest.  -- He rejected the conclusions of the latest U.S. National Intelligence Estimate assessing that Pakistan had failed to prevent the regrouping of al Qaeda along the Pak-Afghan border.  Opposition Reaction -------------------  3.  (C)  Musharraf will face a firestorm of criticism from opposition parties for his decision to seek re-election, in uniform, before the current assemblies.  Many of his opponents had hoped Musharraf would wait until after national and provincial elections (scheduled to occur by early next year) because they believe that the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party will lose seats in the national and provincial assemblies.  At an All Parties Opposition conference in London July 7-8 (septel), there were calls for a mass resignation from parliament if Musharraf attempted reelection from the current assemblies.  However, the two opposition parties with the largest electoral base, the Pakistan People's Party and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, did not endorse the call for mass resignation.  The opposition thus remains fragmented in how to move forward.  Musharraf/MFA Reject U.S. NIE -----------------------------  4. (U) In rejecting the latest U.S. National Intelligence Estimate, Musharraf told the editors that the country was in open battle with Islamic militants, that al Qaeda was on the run in tribal areas and that the flow of Taliban from Pakistan into Afghanistan has been reduced. He added that two divisions of Army troops had deployed to troubled border areas (between Dera Ismail Khan and Malakand) and that these troops will be supplemented in December by a newly-trained  ISLAMABAD 00003128  002 OF 002   and better-equipped paramilitary force that would handle the militancy.  5. (U) Foreign Office Spokesperson Tasneem Aslam on July 18 echoed Musharraf's rejection, stating \"It does not help simply to make assertions about the presence or regeneration of al Qaeda... What is needed is concrete and actionable information and intelligence sharing.\" Aslam also re-asserted Pakistan's territorial sovereignty: any counter-terror action on Pakistani soil would be conducted by Pakistani security forces.  6. (C) Comment:  Editors reported that Musharraf appeared more relaxed and confident than he has been in months.  The Red Mosque operation appears to have galvanized his determination to launch a campaign against extremists and provided what he sees as a clear rationale to seek re-election in uniform. In reaching out to moderates in media and society, however, Musharraf recognized that the fight against extremists cannot be won with military forces alone. Although opposition political parties will severely criticize Musharraf's decision to seek re-election, in uniform, before the current assembly, the fragmented opposition faces a challenge in how to respond. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2699", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/20/2007 13:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003154  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/19/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT RULES THAT CHIEF JUSTICE MUST BE REINSTATED  REF: ISLAMABAD 2699 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C)  Summary:  On June 20, the Supreme Court of Pakistan ruled that President Musharraf's suspension of the Chief Justice had been unconstitutional.  The court's decision was not unexpected, a fact that did not stop the media from turning the day leading up to the announcement into a live-from-in-front-of-the-Supreme-Court spectacle.  If the President accepts the decision gracefully, as his advisors are encouraging him to do, he and his party should still be able to engage in damage control and put the controversy quickly behind them.  End Summary.  2. (C)  On July 20, a 13 member bench of Pakistan's Supreme Court ruled that the Chief Justice Mohammad Iftikhar Chaudhry must be reinstated.  In the 10-3 decision, the court stated that President Musharraf exceeded his constitutional authority when, on March 9, he presented the Chief Justice with a reference (charge sheet), convened a Supreme Judicial Council to hold hearings on the reference, and suspended the Chief Justice.  The vote on all the key items was 10-3, with the exception of the issue of whether the Supreme Court was constitutionally empowered to rule on various petitions related to the Chief Justice controversy.  On the last item, the Court was unanimous in accepting jurisdiction.  3.  (C)  Shortly after the announcement, Prime Minister Aziz told reporters  he had \"always maintained a decision by the honorable court must be accepted by all sections of the people including the government itself.\"  As of close of business Pakistan time, the government had not issued an official statement.  4.  (SBU)  Background:  In early March, President Musharraf presented a reference (charge sheet) to the Chief Justice of Pakistan.   Most of the complaints involved minor corruption and nepotism.  The same day, the President ordered the establishment of a \"Supreme Judicial Council\" to decide the merits of the reference against the Chief Justice.  In late April, the Supreme Court of Pakistan agreed to hear arguments on a variety of petitions concerning the Chief Justice's case and the constitutionality of convening the Supreme Judicial Council.  On May 7, the Supreme Court ordered the Supreme Judicial Council to suspend proceedings on the Chief Justice's case until the Supreme Court ruled on various related petitions.  The July 20 ruling effectively ends the Supreme Judicial Council proceedings against the Chief Justice.  5.  (C)  Comment:  Musharraf's advisors had warned him since April that he would lose the Supreme Court case.  The same advisors had been hoping for an early decision by the court so that they could engage in damage control and move their focus to preparing for the election.  Today's verdict, while embarrassing to the President -- who has always said he would abide by the decision -- should allow him and his party to do just that.  End Comment.     PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1842", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/24/2007 12:04", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003199  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN POLITICAL LANDSCAPE, PART 1: POLITICAL PARTY PRIMER  REF: ISLAMABAD 1842  1. (SBU) Summary.   Pakistan's multi-party parliamentary system includes large personality-based secular parties, regional nationalist/ethnic parties with limited appeal and surprisingly democratic religious parties.  Party/personal loyalty and a spoils system count for more with voters than often non-existent party platforms.  Illiterate workers often vote as directed by feudal landowners or factory owners in a politically moderate but religiously conservative Islamic society.  Three key politicians lead their parties from exile in London, and few but the wealthy elite can afford to run for office.  Despite institutional constraints, the constant activity of this alphabet soup of parties keeps Pakistan's political scene vibrant.  This cable is the first in a series exploring Pakistan's political party landscape in the run-up to 2007/2008 parliamentary elections. End summary.  THE RULING COALITION --------------------  2. (U) The ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML), often referred to as PML-Q (Quaid-i-Azam), is President Musharraf's ruling party. The PML enjoys Pakistan's best brand-name in politics, since the country's founder Muhammad Ali Jinnah led the original Muslim League. The PML controls 153 seats in the 342-seat National Assembly. PML president Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and his cousin Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi are the main political actors within the party; and they help to maintain PML's strong support base in the Punjab, Pakistan's most populous province. There are several other smaller parties in the ruling coalition, including the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) and the Pakistan People's Party-Sherpao (PPP-S).  3. (SBU) Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM): A secular democratic party by its manifesto, the MQM is concentrated in Sindh and has been known for its violent past. The party's base remains the \"mohajirs,\" those Pakistanis who migrated from India at partition, and their descendants. The MQM has 18 seats in the National Assembly. The party's founder, Altaf Hussain, lives in London, reportedly because he fears for his safety in Pakistan. Political violence on May 12 in Karachi has largely been blamed on the MQM and has tarnished its efforts to gain nation-wide appeal.  4. (U) Pakistan People's Party-Sherpao (PPP-S): Interior Minister Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao leads a small faction of the PPP that broke off from Benazir Bhutto's main party to join President Musharraf's coalition. The PPP-S holds only 2 seats in the National Assembly; however, Sherpao is highly influential in his native Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).   THE OPPOSITION PARTIES ----------------------  5. (U) Pakistan People's Party (PPP): The PPP was founded by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, whose daughter Benazir inherited the party after Zia ul-Haq's regime executed her father. It is the most liberal of the national parties in Pakistan and has promoted both economic and social reforms. It remains centered around the personality of Benazir Bhutto, who has lived in self-imposed exile in London and Dubai since 1999. Bhutto faces corruption charges in Pakistan and abroad from her two previous terms as Prime Minister (1988-90, 1993-96). The PPP holds 55 seats in the National Assembly, which is over one-third of the opposition bench, and is overall the single most popular party in Pakistan. The PPP's stronghold remains in Sindh, but it also enjoys grassroots support nationwide.  6. (U) Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N): The Nawaz faction split from the PML after the Musharraf-led coup in 1999. Nawaz Sharif and his brother Shahbaz, both of whom divide their time between London and Saudi Arabia, lead the party. After the 1999 coup, the Pakistan Supreme Court found Nawaz guilty of corruption and Musharraf exiled him to Saudi Arabia until 2010. The PML-N holds 16 seats in the  ISLAMABAD 00003199  002 OF 002   opposition. The July 2007 formation of a new All Parties Democratic Alliance effectively ended PML-N's uncomfortable alliance with the PPP. The PML-N has a support base among right-of-center Punjabis, especially those in medium-sized industrial cities.  7. (U) Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA): The MMA, a political alliance of six religious parties, has 66 seats in the National Assembly and thus holds the most seats in the opposition. It is the ruling party in the NWFP provincial assembly and is in the ruling coalition with the PML-Q in the Baluchistan provincial assembly. The two largest and most influential parties in the MMA are the Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F). MMA president Qazi Hussain Ahmad also leads the JI and his party's support base is in the urban middle class. Maulana Fazlur Rehman is the leader of the opposition in the National Assembly and also leads the JUI-F. His party appeals mostly to Pashtuns in the NWFP and Baluchistan. The JI is a revivalist party similar to the Muslim Brotherhood and it appeals to a narrow sector of the educated, conservative middle class. The JUI-F is a more traditional Deobandi party that has far wider appeal to tribal conservatives.  8. (SBU) Pakistan Tehreek Insaaf (PTI): Led by former Pakistan cricket star, Imran Khan, PTI holds only one seat in the national assembly. Though a minor party, Khan's media-savvy opposition message endears him to many Pakistanis and expatriates. PTI - with little political capital of its own to lose - is a vocal supporter of the new opposition alliance with the PML-N and the MMA.  9. (U) The Nationalist Parties: The other smaller parties in the opposition include Pashtun nationalist parties: Awami National Party (ANP) and Pukhtunkhwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP). There are several Baluch nationalist parties in the opposition: Baluch National Party (BNP), National Party (NP), and Jahmoori Watan Party (JWP). All the nationalist parties are secular and appeal to their regional and ethnic constituencies and feel disenfranchised by Punjabi-dominate national politics. All have minimal political power at the national level.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3199|07ISLAMABAD3200", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/24/2007 12:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003200  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/16/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN POLITICAL LANDSCAPE, PART 2: FRACTURED OPPOSITION PREPARES FOR ELECTIONS  REF: ISLAMABAD 3199  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Unable to unite at the All Parties Conference (APC) for en masse resignations or mass street protests, Pakistan's severely fractured opposition is unlikely to mount a credible challenge to President Musharraf's bid to seek re-election under the current assemblies. Unsurprisingly the July 7-8 conference did not yield any coherent action plan to unite the opposition parties and its joint declaration was another longwinded statement of complaints against the Musharraf government. The conference did cement a long-simmering split between Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and the rest of the opposition. End Summary.  2. (U) This cable is the second in a series exploring Pakistan,s political party landscape in the run-up to elections.  ALL PARTIES CONFERENCE ----------------------  3. (U) On July 7-8, representatives from all opposition parties met in London to discuss a coordinated strategy in the months leading to the general and presidential elections. The meeting was largely overshadowed by the government's military operation against the Red Mosque in Islamabad, and received little press coverage. The conference was, however, instrumental in highlighting the growing fissures within the opposition - most importantly those between former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's PPP and the rest of the opposition. The split was cemented by former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's announcement of a new political alliance of all opposition parties except the PPP.  4. (C) Former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto sent low-level PPP representatives to the APC, despite her presence in London, because of her continuing differences with the religious party alliance Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA). (Note. The PPP is a staunchly secular, liberal party and refuses to coordinate or ally with any religious parties. End Note.) Bhutto's lack of full participation signaled the irrelevancy of the APC and confirmed the suspicions of other opposition parties about PPP's back-channel talks with President Musharraf.  5. (C) At the APC, most parties called for the opposition to resign en masse if Musharraf held presidential elections under the current assemblies. However, resistance from the PPP and the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) stopped the opposition from adopting this decision. (Note. The JUI-F is the largest member of the MMA. The JUI-F and the PPP are the two largest vote blocs in the opposition. End Note.)  6. (U) After two days of talks the opposition cobbled together a declaration that is a series of complaints against the government, including: demands for a free and fair election, demands for the immediate resignation of President Musharraf, redress for the March 12 violence in Karachi, cessation of army operations in Baluchistan, reinstatement of the Chief Justice, and a myriad of other complaints. The loosely-worded document does not outline any concrete steps for the opposition and its language leaves plenty of room for each party to interpret its own separate course of action.  ALL PARTIES DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE -------------------------------  7. (C) After the APC, Nawaz Sharif formed a new coalition called the All Parties Democratic Alliance (APDA) that includes all opposition parties with the exception of the PPP. The APDA has not unveiled any pre-elections plans but has announced that its singular aim will be to demand the resignation of President Musharraf. When asked how this was to be accomplished, MMA leader Liaqat Baloch said that the APDA would agitate in the streets and seek recourse in the courts.   ISLAMABAD 00003200  002 OF 002   8. (SBU) APDA held its first meeting in Islamabad on July 23. They have also planned rallies in Quetta on August 9 and Rawalpindi on August 14. The new alliance has clearly demarcated PPP's stance outside the allied opposition. The Quetta rally will also be a test of MMA's (specifically the JUI-F's) will to stay with the opposition, since the first protest will be in Baluchistan, where the provincial government is an MMA and ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) coalition government. Septel cables will discuss both PML-N's and MMA's strategies with the new alliance.  POLITICAL TURNING POINTS ------------------------  9. (C) On July 18, President Musharraf announced publicly that he will seek re-election under the current electoral college (made up of the sitting national and provincial assemblies). This announcement was followed by the landmark Supreme Court decision on July 20 to reinstate Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry. The court's decision is being hailed as a significant victory for the opposition cause, however, any future hopes of the Supreme Court opposing Musharraf's re-election plans are based on a moral rather than legal arguments. In the wake of the decision, Benazir Bhutto publicly announced a deal with President Musharraf was \"unlikely\" and party officials said they will challenge Musharraf's decision in court. President Musharraf's announcement and the legal victory have not been an adequate impetus for the opposition parties to unite in calling for mass resignations from the assemblies. Bhutto's announcement is seen as another flip-flop in a long series of political maneuvers. Distrust between opposition parties continues to grow as elections approach and rumors of political deals continue.   MISSED OPPORTUNITIES TO UNITE, POWER POLITICS --------------------------------------------- -  10. (C) Comment: The APC was not taken seriously from the beginning, dooming it to produce a watered-down and emotional declaration. Parties with the most to lose electorally (PPP and JUI-F) made sure that the question of whether to resign from the National Assembly was left undecided. This strategic move by the PPP and the JUI-F has made clear that both parties command vote-banks which none of the other opposition parties enjoy and they are not willing to gamble any future power-sharing arrangements by standing too close to the opposition. The rest of the opposition, with the PML-N leading them, is now trying to strategize about its own electoral prospects. However, with the realization that they do not hold the votes to effectively counter any PPP or JUI-F alliance with the ruling PML, the new opposition APDA will likely be another vehicle for vociferous protests that do not yield real political or electoral changes. End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3028", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/24/2007 14:37", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003201  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/23/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PINS, PK SUBJECT: GREENING THE RED MOSQUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 3028  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The government plans to re-open the Red Mosque on July 27 under a newly repainted green dome. The work of bulldozers and painters is so far proving more straightforward than finding partners for President Musharraf's July 12 call to help bring Pakistan's madrassas into the mainstream. End Summary.  2. (U) On July 23, a government demolition team appeared at Islamabad's now-infamous Red Mosque complex to begin tearing down the adjacent Jamia Hafsa madrassa (religious school), much of which was damaged and rendered unsafe during the government's recent military operation (reftel). Among the first areas demolished were the residential quarters of the mosque's leader (Maulana Abdul Aziz, currently in police custody) and his brother (Abdul Rahid Ghazi, who was killed during the operation).  3. (U) The government is also renovating the Red Mosque itself, and government officials hope the mosque can be re-opened in time for this week's Friday prayers. There have been reports that part of the renovation will include repainting the mosque's distinctive red dome to a more traditional green.  4. (U) In a nationwide address on July 12, President Musharraf called on moderate forces and Wafaqul Madaris, the largest Deobandi seminary accreditation board, to support the government's efforts to deal with terrorism and religious extremism.  5. (U) On July 23, Prime Minister Aziz chaired a meeting of senior government officials who agreed in principle to establish a new network of government-sponsored madrassas that would provide religious and vocational education as well as free room and board for poor students. The new network of schools -- to be known as \"Dar ul Ilm\" (abode of knowledge) -- would be developed in consultation with leading religious scholars, according to press reports.  6. (U) Wafaqul Madaris, publicly rejected the government's invitation for talks about the creation of a new madrassa network.  Wafaqul Madaris Secretary General Maulana Hafiz Jalandhry told reporters that the group's central executive committee plans to meet on August 6 to discuss challenging the government's operation against the Red Mosque in the Supreme Court.  7. (C) Comment: Less than one percent of Pakistan's full-time students attend madrassas. Most (approximately 70 percent) attend poorly-funded, poorly managed public schools and the rest (approximately 30 percent) attend private schools. Madrassas still weigh large on the Pakistani public and international mind, however, and Musharraf has tried several times unsuccessfully to bring them under closer government control.  In June, the government ended a program to mainstream Pakistan's madrassas by providing funding in exchange for reforms.  After five years of trying to convince madrassas to expel foreign students, add secular subjects to their curriculae, and make their financing mechanisms transparent, only 400-500 of an estimated 13,000 madrassas accepted government funding.  Even with the close cooperation of religious leaders, the creation of a network of new, state-sponsored religious schools would be controversial and exceedingly difficult to implement.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE95647", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/25/2007 9:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003217  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/OMA DHAVILAND, EB/ESC LLAMBERT AND SCA/RA MURENA TREASURY FOR SSEGAL, PDERGARABEDIAN AND ASHARMA COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA JUSTICE FOR LSAMUEL WARSAW FOR RSEAMAN ABU DHABI FOR BMULLINAX  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: KTFN, EFIN, PTER, ECON, PREL, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON AML BILL DELIVERED TO GOP  REF: STATE 95647  1.  (SBU) Summary:  On July 16 EconCouns delivered reftel demarche to Muhammad Javed Malik, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Nuzhrat Bashir, Joint Secretary for Banking, Ministry of Finance. EconCouns pointed out the extensive amount of time Pakistan has been working on passing Anti-Money Laundering (AML) legislation and the possible repercussions if the legislation is not passed in a timely manner.  Malik assured her the AML bill would be passed out of the Standing Committee and on to the full National Assembly soon.  Subsequently, the bill was reported out of the sub-committee and back to the Standing Committee on July 17.  Ministry of Finance expects \"smooth sailing\" through the National Assembly, although there is no legislative timetable.  EconCouns also brought up the importance in signing and ratifying the U.N. Convention Against Terrorist Financing.   Malik stated that Pakistan was 83 percent in compliance with the U.N. Convention.  End Summary  2.  (SBU) EconCouns met with Muhammad Javed Malik, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Nuzhrat Bashir, Joint Secretary  SIPDIS for Banking, Ministry of Finance on July 16 to deliver reftel demarche, highlighting serious ramifications for Pakistan if an AML bill is not passed soon.  Malik assured EconCouns passing this bill was a high priority of the GOP and that the sub-committee now reviewing the bill would be passing it to the Standing Committee before the end of the week. (Note: the sub-committee approved the bill and passed it to the Standing Committee on July 17.  The Standing Committee should meet in the next few days to review the bill.  End note).  EconCouns also reminded Malik of the importance of Pakistan signing and ratifying the U.N. Convention Against Terrorist Financing.  Malik replied that Pakistan is already 83 percent in compliance with the convention.  3.  (SBU) Although Malik expressed concern that investment will decline because investors will be concerned that their transactions are being scrutinized, he recognizes that the consequences of not passing the legislation are worse.  He explained that because the government party has the majority in the National Assembly, once the bill comes to a vote there, it will be passed.  EconCouns also pointed out that the Asia-Pacific Group would be meeting in Perth July 23 and that it considered its recent visit to Pakistan less than satisfactory.  We also reviewed possible consequences, should the GOP not pass AML quickly.  Malik was aware of possible FATF actions, commenting that the GOP planned to send a robust delegation to Perth, including the Governor of the Central Bank.  He fully understood that the GOP would be criticized in Perth.  4.  (SBU)  In an effort to widen our net and increase pressure on the GOP, we discreetly raised our concerns about Pakistan's slow enactment of the AML in Econ Counselor's courtesy calls on the IMF ResRep and Citibank.  The IMF ResRep commented that enactment of AML was part of the 2004 IMF facility, and he was surprised that the legislation had not yet been enacted.  He promised to approach the Ministry of Finance as well.  Citibank expressed its concerns and offered to raise the issue through its channels. The Ambassador has also raised AML in her courtesy calls with the Minister of Commerce and the Finance Advisor to the Prime Minister.  Patterson " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/25/2007 14:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 003224  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, ENRG, PK SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER: GOP COMMITTED 200 PERCENT TO FIGHTING TERRORISM   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Ambassador, DCM and Economic Counselor (notetaker) met with Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz at his request at his residence July 24.  Aziz took Ambassador to task over recent statements by U.S. officials regarding terrorist threats emanating from Pakistan.  Aziz stressed to Ambassador that these statements make the job of fighting terrorism far more difficult for his government, which is \"committed 200 percent to fighting terrorism.\"  Ambassador said that she understood the statements had provoked a negative reaction in the Pakistani press, but that they reflected wide concern about the situation in Pakistan. Ambassador added that she would report what Aziz had said. Aziz also urged greater efforts in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), pointing to the considerable resources Pakistan is devoting, and reiterated that the government will abide by the Supreme Court ruling on the Chief Justice case. Ambassador emphasized U.S. support for the government's efforts in the FATA.  Aziz said that the India-Pakistan-Iran pipeline is a part of Pakistan's energy supply strategy.  End Summary.  U.S. statements over the weekend --------------------------------  2. (SBU) Ambassador, DCM and Economic Counselor (notetaker) met with Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz at his request at his residence July 24.  Foreign Minister Kasuri, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Additional Secretary Zamir Akram, Principal Secretary Halid Saeed, and MFA Director General-Americas Sohail Mahmood (notetaker) also participated.  3. (C) Aziz told Ambassador that the Pakistani government has already expressed its views on the various U.S. statements about Pakistan's efforts to fight terrorism and would not react to individual statements from U.S. officials.  He criticized these statements for making the government's job far more difficult and giving a boost to the religious parties, especially outside Islamabad.  While Pakistan will not allow its territory to be a safe haven, it will not permit foreign troops to operate here either.  Aziz stressed that the government is committed to cooperation on counter-terrorism activities.  Aziz particularly emphasized intelligence cooperation as a major asset.  He pointed that while the government has no information that Osama bin-Laden is in Pakistan, he could be anywhere along Pakistan and Afghanistan's 1400 mile border.  However, if there is intelligence that he is in Pakistan, the government will find him.  \"Pakistan is committed 200 percent to fight terrorism,\" Aziz stated.  The counter-terrorism fight is in our national interest and we \"fight out of conviction.\"  4. (C) Aziz added that more U.S. statements will have an unwelcome effect on certain sectors of the Pakistani public. He said these statements made it more difficult to fight terrorism because the Pakistani government was seen as doing this at the behest of the Americans.  Ambassador said she recognized that the statements had played badly in the Pakistani press -- every single Urdu newspaper monitored in the embassy had had an editorial expressing its strong defense of Pakistani sovereignty -- but the statements reflected U.S. concern about the developments in the FATA. When she commented on the Urdu language press, Aziz replied that the press does not fully convey the extreme public reaction, and stories on the street about American intervention are worse.  Ambassador said that she would report what he said but as a practical matter, which Aziz understood after his many years living in our country, U.S. officials would continue to speak about whatever topic they wanted.  5. (C) Aziz then said that many reporters were telling him that there was a purposeful campaign of leaks by \"American intelligence officials\" against Pakistan.  He said he had heard this fact a number of times from American reporters who called him for comment on these allegations.  Ambassador agreed that leaks were very damaging and that in her experience they seemed particularly bad in Pakistan's case -- she mentioned as an example the conclusions of the highly classified National Intelligence Estimate which had leaked immediately to the press -- but again, there was little she or anyone else could do about them.  She emphasized that the official statement of U.S. government policy was the  ISLAMABAD 00003224  002 OF 003   President's Saturday radio address which had unusually been devoted to Pakistan and was very positive about the relationship.  Aziz said they had read this carefully and were appreciative of the President's remarks.  Red Mosque fallout ------------------  6. (C) Aziz described the decision to intervene militarily in the Red Mosque as one of the government's most difficult and was made after a long debate involving President Musharraf. The government's strategy to limit casualties and get the majority of the hostages out worked, with only 77 casualties.  He said that he will attend prayers at the mosque on July 26 prior to reopening to the public the following day.  Violent reactions to the incident did not surprise the government, but he felt that, on the whole, public opinion about the government's actions was positive.  7. (C) As a result of the Red Mosque incident, the government is now putting into place a series of schools to supplant the madrassa system.  While acknowledging the role of religious education, Aziz explained that the government needs to win \"hearts and minds.\"  He had spoken with some of the young 16 to 18 year olds displaced from the Red Mosque's madrassa and was struck by their lack of contact with the outside world. All of these students came from the northern provinces; a sizeable number were orphans.  At these new schools, students can either board or attend day school; will be taught by relatively well-paid, qualified teachers; and each orphaned student will receive 1000 rupees per month while parents of students will receive 2000 rupees per month.  Events in the north -------------------  8. (C) Aziz emphasized that the government will show zero tolerance for any attacks, and had begun to move additional troops to the north several weeks ago.  However, the area is still under-policed and the government is hiring additional officers.  At one point, there were only 160 government forces engaged in a pitched battle against 8200 insurgents. Ambassador assured U.S. support, pointing out that the U.S. is delivering equipment and constructing a training center. She and Aziz agreed that additional assistance needs to be put in place quickly, in much the same way that the earthquake assistance was deployed.  DCM added that the earthquake example of using senior officials to disburse aid would be effective in the FATA as well.  Ambassador added that significant international donor support for FATA activities is emerging.  Supreme Court verdict ---------------------  9. (C) Echoing his public statements about the Chief Justice issue, Aziz said that the government \"would move on\" after the Supreme Court verdict in the Chief Justice case.  Pakistan's energy concerns --------------------------  10. (C) Aziz segued into Pakistan's energy needs.  He said that the economy continues to grow, making energy supplies a major concern.  He noted that sales of fans and air conditioners are growing at 16 percent annually, twice the economic growth rate.  Aziz made the case for purchasing energy from Iran and for the India-Pakistan-Iran pipeline. Characterizing the Iranians as tough negotiators and unafraid to backtrack, Aziz could not predict whether work on the the pipeline would begin in months or years, but commented that it is moving ahead more quickly than expected.  Describing Iranian gas as an essential part of Pakistan's diversification and energy strategy, Aziz said he did not anticipate any Pakistani investment in Iran or vice-versa. He added that Pakistan is looking at domestic exploration and other sources, but he did not hold out much hope for Turkmen gas, given the situation in Afghanistan.  Ambassador reiterated U.S. government opposition to the pipeline and said she understood that talks had been underway since 1993, so perhaps a deal was not imminent.  Comment -------  ISLAMABAD 00003224  003 OF 003    11. (C) Aziz was well aware that there was a difference of opinion on a number of issues covered, but delivered his views in a low-key self-assured manner.  He gave the impression that the government is firmly in control of current events, deliberating carefully over next steps, and will proceed normally with the electoral schedule.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE95746", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/26/2007 10:20", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 003236  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/ESC LLAMBERT JUSTICE FOR LSAMUEL TREASURY FOR PDERGARABEDIAN, ASHARMA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/26/2017 TAGS: ECON, EFIN, EINV, KTFN, PREL, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON AL RASHID TRUST DELIVERED TO GOP  REF: STATE 95746  Classified By: DCM PETER W. BODDE FOR REASONS 1.4(b) AND (d)  (S) On September 25, EconOff delivered reftel demarche to Brigadier Javed Iqbal Cheema, Director General of the National Crisis Management Cell. (Note: It was Cheema's office that ordered the closure of Al Rashid Trust offices in February 2007.  End Note). He appreciated the classified information released to him and assured EconOff it would not be released publicly. He stated there would be a meeting of Foreign Home Secretaries and Inspectors General of Police tomorrow, and he would pass on this information to them to make discreet inquiries.  He will also pass on this information to the provinces for their investigation.  He promised to follow up with Post on any information indicating Al Rashid Trust is still operating. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2794|07ISLAMABAD3168", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/26/2007 13:54", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003246  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/26/2017 TAGS: MARR, PREL, PK SUBJECT: F-16 BASING:  REQUEST FOR BASING REVIEW  REF: (A) ISLAMABAD 3168 (B) ISLAMABAD 2794  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.5 (b), (d).  1.  (C)  Summary and Action Request.  Following Ambassador's July 21 meeting with Pakistan Air Chief Marshall Tanvir, post requests a review of paragraph 9 (basing and personnel restrictions) of the pending security notes for the $3 billion sale of 18 block 52 F-16s to Pakistan before the Congressional hearing scheduled for August 16.  2. (C)  The purpose of the sale was two-fold: to augment Pakistan's defensive capacity; and to send a strong political signal that the U.S. intends to remain engaged in Pakistan. Current basing and personnel restrictions make full use of the aircraft impractical, effectively sub-optimizing the capabilities of the aircraft and undermining the purpose of the sale.  Post believes there is scope to amend these restrictions in a way that both protects U.S. security interests and enables more effective use of the aircraft for Pakistani and U.S. interests. End Summary and Action Request.   3.  (C)  Ref A reports on Ambassador's July 21 meeting with Pakistan Air Chief Marshall Tanvir to inform him that mid-life upgrades to Pakistan's existing F-16 and EDA F-16 aircraft must occur outside of Pakistan. Tanvir reported that the Pakistan Air Force would base its new block 52 F-16s (currently in production) and some MLU aircraft at Shabaz Airfield in Jacobabad.  He requested information on the security survey soonest so the Pakistan Air force can begin making the necessary budget and engineering decisions necessary to comply with the security notes.  4.  (C)  Tanvir stated that Shabaz would be an all F-16 base; however, he stressed the need to also base French manufactured Alouette rescue helicopters at Shabaz for safety reasons.  As we noted in Ref B, other foreign origin aircraft -- particularly Spanish made C-235s for supply and troop transport and Russian and Ukrainian built MI-17 helicopters for troop transport -- would also need access to Shabaz if the Pakistan Air Force were to efficiently carry out its day-to-day operations and training.  5.  (C)  Post appreciates support for the waiver process we proposed in Ref B but also requests a review of the personnel restrictions to determine how they could negatively affect joint exercises and Pakistani pilot training.  6.  Comment:  Strict interpretation and adherence to current basing restrictions will cause serious operational, training and safety problems for the Pakistan Air Force and will impose added costs beyond those expected to arise from the security survey.  Further, the basing restrictions, in our view, simply do not improve the security of U.S. technology. We believe it should be possible to monitor the security of the F-16s while allowing Pakistani-owned, foreign manufactured aircraft access to a different part of the same base.  We request Washington consider ways to both meet our national security needs and help Pakistan obtain the most operational value from their significant investment in these F-16s.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07Islamabad2944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/27/2007 2:41", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003247  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT TELLS ELECTION COMMISSION TO BEEF UP VOTER ROLLS  REF: Islamabad 2944  1. (U) On July 26, a full Supreme Court bench -- including recently restored Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry -- directed the Election Commission of Pakistan to develop by August 10 a plan to increase the number of names on the draft voter rolls.  2. (U) The Supreme Court's direction was in response to a petition submitted by the Pakistan People's Party complaining that the draft voter's list did not represent a sufficient number of eligible voters. (Note: The 2007 voter list contains approximately 52 million names, whereas there are an estimated 82 million people who are eligible to vote.  End Note.)  3. (SBU) The Court focused its attention on the problems created by requiring voters to possess computerized national identity cards to register.  Chief Justice Chaudhry said that such a requirement was in apparent contravention of the constitution and that other forms of identification should be acceptable for registration.  (Note: The Election Commission accepts both old and new computerized identity cards for registration purposes; however, they still require that voters present new cards on election day, which could disenfranchise a significant number of voters.  End Note.)  4. (SBU) It should be relatively easy for the Election Commission to change their requirement for what forms of identification are acceptable on election day.  We believe that the most efficient and credible way of adding a significant number of names to the voters' list is to merge the 2007 draft voter list with the National Database Registration Authority's (NADRA) database of Computerized National Identity Card holders, a process that could add up to 22 million names to the voters' list (reftel).  The Election Commission is still investigating the technical feasibility of the idea (originally proposed by IFES), but the Supreme Court order provides the legal cover necessary to make such a merger.  We will be watching closely over the next two weeks to see how the Commission responds to the Supreme Court order. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3201", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/27/2007 13:41", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003269  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PTER, ASEC, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE FLARES UP AGAIN, SUICIDE BLAST AT NEARBY MARKET  REF: ISLAMABAD 3201  1. (U) Security forcces have re-taken the Red Mosque after July 27 demonstrations. Hundreds of unarmed religious students and local attendees of Friday prayers protested the re-opening of the Red Mosque. Refusing to pray behind the government-appointed prayer leader Maulana Ashfaq, protesters removed him from the mosque. Protestors also shouted anti-Musharraf slogans, threw rocks, started re-painting the mosque red (the government had begun to paint over the red), and demanded that the government free Abdul Aziz, the mosque's former leader, and allow him to lead prayers. Protestors expelled journalists and others, including religious party political leader Liaqat Baloch from the mosque. Security forces outside the mosque launched tear gas shells at the agitators. Protestors outside the mosque dispersed after the tear gas was fired; however, many remained inside the mosque.  2. (U) Soon after security forces surrounded the Red Mosque, an explosion occurred at the nearby Aapbara Market. According to police contacts, a suicide bomber detonated himself near a police vehicle. The same police source reported that so far eighteen have died, including at least four police officers, and twenty-two people were wounded.  On hearing the blast, most of the remaining protesters at the Red Mosque headed toward the Aapbara Market blast site.  3. (U) In the Balochistan capital of Quetta, unidentified gunmen fired at the vehicle of Balochistan government spokesman Raziq Bugti, killing him instantly. ConGen Karachi is reporting septel.  4. (SBU) The Aapbara market area has been off-limits to official Americans for years. There are no reports of American casualties. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3269", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/30/2007 12:39", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003290  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, ASEC SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE UPDATE - JULY 30, 2007  REF: ISLAMABAD 03269 AND PREVIOUS  1.  (SBU) The Government of Pakistan closed the Red Mosque indefinitely on Friday, July 27 following the re-occupation of the compound by unarmed students and a suicide bombing at nearby Aapbara Market (reftel).  An investigation into the bombing has so far turned up few leads on the bomber's identity, but it appears police at the restaurant were the primary target.  (Note:  Restaurants in the G-6 sector are turning away police out of fear other targeted bombings will follow.  End Note.)  The government's Capital Development Authority is once again painting the mosque white and beige and has renamed it the \"Central Mosque.\"  On July 28 Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz met with family members of some of the students who have been missing since the government's operation against the mosque and promised the government would help find the students.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/30/2007 14:01", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003291  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/30/2017 TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: GROWING PERCEPTION THAT U.S. WILL ABANDON PAKISTAN   Classified By: Anne Patterson, For Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1.  (SBU) Summary:  News that the U.S. House and Senate had approved House Resolution 1 with language requiring the President report annually on Pakistan's efforts in the War on Terror predictably caused a stir in Islamabad.  The media's interpretation of the bill narrowly focused on the perceived \"certification requirement.\"  Comparisons with the Pressler Amendment came fast and furious in newspapers and on television July 27 and 28.  (Note:  Aside from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman, government officials did not comment publicly on the resolution.  End Note.)  Combined with select coverage of recent statements by senior U.S. officials, the passage of the resolution fed the interpretation endorsed by some pundits that the U.S. is distancing itself from Pakistan in its hour of need.  Most prominent newspapers (Urdu and English) also speculated that the U.S. was contemplating unilateral military action in the FATA.  End Summary.  2.  (C) During a private meeting with the Ambassador on July 27, Prime Minister Aziz raised recent statements by U.S. officials about Pakistan's efforts in the War on Terror, emphasizing the negative impact these statements were having on counter-terror cooperation.  The Ambassador explained that many of the statements - by Under Secretary Burns, Fran Townsend, and Defense Intelligence Agency Director James Clapper - were being quoted out of context and exaggerated in the media.  The Prime Minister said he understood the press was over-reacting but that both countries needed to manage media reactions during their respective campaign seasons.  It was difficult, he added, for politicians and high officials to respond to sharp questions about U.S. aims to \"invade Pakistan.\"  3.  (U) President Musharraf, Foreign Minister Kasuri, and leading Senators talked to the media about recent U.S. statements on Pakistan on July 27.  Musharraf said Pakistani forces were \"fully capable\" of pursuing extremists in FATA and didn't need intervention from the U.S.  During a press conference with visiting British Foreign Secretary David Miliband on Friday, Foreign Minister Kasuri said recent U.S. statements were \"irresponsible and counter-productive.\" Pakistan's Senate Foreign Relations Committee, headed by Secretary General of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League  SIPDIS Mushaid Hussain, called for an end to Pakistan's cooperation in the War on Terror in the event of unilateral U.S. or NATO military action in Pakistani territory.  4.  (C) Comment:  With the end of the Chief Justice case, election season has kicked into high gear.  Sensitivity to the media's select coverage of U.S. statements and legislative action will increase in the first few months, as Pakistani officials and politicians seize opportunities to stoutly defend Pakistan's sovereignty.  Acknowledgment of Pakistan's sacrifices in the War on Terror will help to counter the perception that the U.S. is distancing itself from Pakistan, especially as select press coverage of House Resolution 1 stokes the anxieties of Pakistanis who remember the economic pain caused by the Pressler years.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "7/31/2007 6:14", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 003296  SIPDIS  AID/ANE FOR: NMADHAV, RSTEELMAN  AID/OFDA FOR: RTHAYER, TDOLAN  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAID, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SITUATION REPORT #2 - CYCLONE YEMYIN   -------- Summary --------  1.  (U) SUMMARY:  A USAID Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) Regional Advisor (RA) visited Pakistan from July 10 through 17 to assess additional needs following Cyclone Yemyin in Pakistan.  To date 362 people have died in flooding and up to 2.5 million people have been affected.  In addition to the USD 390,000 provided through the AmbassadorQs Emergency Fund and OFDA to Mercy Corps for emergency response, the RA recommends that OFDA provide an additional USD 1.6 million for emergency shelter, water and sanitation, and disease surveillance in Pakistan. USAID/OFDA will continue to monitor needs of affected communities and will make further recommendations on needs for livelihoods and IDP returns.  ----------------- General Situation -----------------  2.  (U) Four days of drenching rains brought on by Cyclone Yemyin that began June 26, 2007 triggered a severe weather system that caused widespread flooding in the Pakistan provinces of Sindh and Balochistan. An estimated 2.5 million people have been affected by the flooding with 362 people dead, 195 missing and over 377,000 people displaced.  According to the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), 2,855 schools, 292 health facilities and 5,197 kilometers of roads have been damaged.  In Balochistan, 23 of 29 districts have been affected while in Sindh 5 of 25 districts are affected.  3.  (U) Many of the affected areas are in arid districts where infrastructure has focused on water retention rather than water drainage.  These structures have contributed to flooding problems with many damaged levees preventing a rapid recession of flood waters.  This is particularly troubling as the Monsoon season is just beginning.  It is estimated that some communities will need emergency assistance for up to 60 days.  ---------------- Health/Nutrition ----------------  4.  (U) Thus far, UNICEF and WHO are reporting no outbreaks of epidemic disease.  There are reports that skin problems and eye infections are common.  The potential for diarrhea outbreaks exists due to hygiene issues and lack of potable water.  The UN Health Cluster reports that there is a potential for malaria as mosquito larva mature over the next few weeks in flooded areas.  Plans are being made for mosquito fogging, and the Government of Pakistan (GoP) has distributed 60,000 bed nets.  Pakistan appears to have enough medicine in-country to handle medical needs. WHO is setting up a disease monitoring and warning system to locate and respond to any disease outbreaks  ISLAMABAD 00003296  002 OF 004   in the flood-affected areas.  5.  (U) NGOs report that the already poor nutritional status of the rural populations in the flood-affected areas will be further exacerbated by anything less than a robust response to food needs following the floods.  (NOTE: The GoP has taken responsibility for providing and distributing food assistance and offers of support by WFP have so far not been accepted.  END NOTE)  ------- Shelter -------  6.  (U) Every assessment conducted thus far has listed shelter, along with water and sanitation, as the primary needs of flood affected people.  IFRC estimates that a total of 167,500 houses have been damaged in Sindh and Balochistan.  The GoP has distributed thousands of tents and originally had plans to distribute up to 100,000 tents.  This seems to have been based on the fact that most flood affected people requested tents, but because of the extreme heat in the area at this time of the year, few people are sheltering in them.  Along with the UN Shelter Cluster, the GoP is now prioritizing tarps and framing materials over tents for distribution to the flood-affected people.  Most people live in self- constructed houses of mud and wood materials and should be able to rebuild their own homes once the flood waters recede.  A compensation package of 15,000 Rupees (approximately USD 250) has been promised to families who have lost their houses to assist with their immediate needs, and an additional 75,000 Rupees (approximately USD 1,250) will be given to each household for the reconstruction of their home.  ---------------- Water/Sanitation ----------------  7.  (U) Water and sanitation are the other main emergency need areas.  People are often stranded along dykes or on high areas surrounded by water.  Most water points have been inundated and many people have been drinking turbid flood water.  Without proper sanitation the surrounding water will become, if it is not already, full of pathogens.  A first priority of the GoP response was to get clean drinking water to people by providing bottled water and/or re-mediating tube wells and water points.  8.  (U) Sanitation is a critical problem but cannot be solved merely by providing latrines.  As was the case in the earthquake response, local people are more used to open defecation, and training/awareness raising will likely be required to persuade them to use pit latrines.  There are also issues pertaining to women and their sanitation needs as discussed further under the Protection Issues section.  -----------------  ISLAMABAD 00003296  003 OF 004   Protection Issues -----------------  9.  (U) Many of the flood-affected communities have very particular traditions concerning the treatment of women.  It will therefore be necessary for all responders to understand these complexities in order not to put women at unnecessary risk.  Nowhere is this more true that in the provision of sanitation facilities for women.  All NGOs responding in the sanitation sector will need to develop a strategy for addressing protection issues for women.  ------------------- Government Response -------------------  10.  (U) Initially the GOP was reluctant to accept international and NGO assistance.  This delayed non- government response for several days.  However, the GoP dedicated over 15,000 military personnel, 24 helicopters, and several C-130 aircraft to the relief operation.  The GoP has flown over 116 C-130 sorties providing over 13,000 tons of relief items.  Mobile medical teams have also been dispatched to address health needs.  NDMA said that 31 relief camps are established in Dadu, and 73 in Qamber-Shahdadkot districts where a total of 56,268 patients have been treated so far.  A GoP official has stated that 29,690 people are living in relief camps in Sindh and 13,000 in 20 camps in Balochistan.  11.  (U) The GoP has allocated  1.131 billion Rupees (approximately USD 18.8 million) to compensate losses incurred by the flood-affected people near Mirani Dam, in the Kech District, Balochistan.  This sum is in addition to the 300 million Rupees (approximately USD 5 million) which the Provincial Government of Balochistan has allocated to compensate the affected population.  12.  (U) Due to the timely warning by the NDMA on June 23, following reports by the Pakistan Meteorological Office, hundreds of lives of fishermen were saved as the local and district governments prevented fishermen from proceeding to the open seas.  Having provided this warning is a credit to PakistanQs fledgling disaster management system.  NDMA said it is fully co- coordinating relief activities in flood-hit areas of Sindh and Balochistan.  NDMA states that all allocations are being handled through the Provincial Disaster Management Authorities, and that NDMA is only a coordinating authority.  13.  (U) The GoP has taken on full responsibility for supplying and distributing food and has declined offers of assistance from WFP.  While Pakistan certainly has the capability to respond to these needs, many in the disaster response community are concerned that food is still showing up as an urgent need in several district assessments.  --------------------------------  ISLAMABAD 00003296  004 OF 004   International Community Response --------------------------------  14.  (U) Though perplexed by GoPQs initial hesitation to allow international assistance in response to Cyclone Yemyin, the UN moved rapidly once permission was granted.  The Cluster System piloted by the UN during the Pakistan Earthquake response was quickly put into place and supported the development of the UN Flash Appeal.  An UNDAC Team was also quickly deployed to Pakistan.  The UN is to be congratulated for working with the GoP to deploy a joint rapid assessment teams made up of GoP, International Organizations, and International NGO personnel.  This contributed to a more informed Flash Appeal and saved significant resources and duplication by avoiding an endless series of individual agency assessments.  It will be important to make additional joint assessments to better understand the changing needs of the affected community and any gaps in assistance.  15.  (U) While an effective tool for coordination, there are some in the donor community who question the Cluster System as a process in its ability to distinguish the most urgent emergency needs from less urgent needs.  Not doing so can lead to inordinately large appeals.  While donors can pick and choose which programs to fund under the Flash Appeal, as was seen in the earthquake response, the Flash Appeal can come to be seen as the single indicator of the size and robustness of the international response; although a significant portion of international funding is provided outside the Flash Appeal process.  --------------- Recommendations ---------------  16.  (U) In addition to the USD 390,000 in emergency assistance provided by the AmbassadorQs Emergency fund and USAID/OFDA to Pakistan through Mercy Corps, the Regional Advisor recommends that an additional USD 1.6 million be provided for shelter, water and sanitation, and disease surveillance.  Particularly in the provision of assistance for water and sanitation, OFDA should ensure that grantees provide a protection plan for addressing womenQs needs.  17.  (U) USAID/OFDA will continue to monitor the needs of the flood-affected population and will make further recommendations on livelihood and IDP return issues when more detailed assessments are completed.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/1/2007 14:03", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003342  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: MARR, MOPS, PK SUBJECT: POST APPROVES 1206 PROPOSAL FOR SSG ENHANCEMENT AND MARITIME SECURITY  1. (U) Post supports the transfer of funds from the Regional Maritime Awareness Capability (RMAC) 1206 program to a new 1206 program of higher priority.  The new program will enhance Pakistan's border operations and maritime security forces.  Specifically, the 1206 funds will be applied to improving maritime counter terrorism (CT) capabilities and CT efforts focused on the Western border area.  2.  (U) The items requested in the new 1206 proposal are for soldier systems and weapons that will enable the Pakistani Special Services Group (SSG) to successfully conduct combat operations in the FATA and along the coast.  Additionally, a portion of the requested funding will be used to enhance the capability and safety of the MI-17 helicopters from Pakistan's 21st Quick Reaction Section that will be used to transport the SSG and the SSG-Navy.  These items include weapons (door guns and mounts), digital radar altimeters, and intercom system improvements.  In all cases, equipment will be issued to the forces as an integral part of the SOCCENT engagement strategy and will be incorporated into established SOF training programs.  3. (U) The items of this list have been subcategorized into four major categories: 1) Soldier Systems, 2) Optics and Electronics, 3) Small Arms and Ammunition, 4) MI-17 Safety Modifications.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3154|07ISLAMABAD3247", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/2/2007 13:07", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003374  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S POLITICAL PARTIES ENGAGE THE SUPREME COURT  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3247      B. ISLAMABAD 3154  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde, for reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: In light of the June 20 landmark Supreme Court decision reinstating the Chief Justice, Pakistan's opposition political parties and civil society have hailed what they see as an invigorated and independent judiciary. Both the Chief Justice and President Musharraf have lauded the new judicial environment and called for strengthening of all government institutions. In the wake of this decision, many political parties are taking their own petitions to the court in hope of finding a sympathetic ear. The Supreme Court's true challenge as a newly energized institution is to remain a balanced and independent body, while avoiding over-activism that would take it into the legislature's domain. END SUMMARY.   CJ AND PRESIDENT STRESS FREEDOM OF JUDICIARY ---------------------------------------------  2. (U) On July 28, in his first public appearance since his reinstatement, Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry asked the legal community to remain on guard and not to allow any unconstitutional steps to disrupt the country's future. Chaudhry exhorted his colleagues, \"This is truly a historic moment. Today the people of Pakistan are looking towards the bar and the bench. Let's not fail them.\" At a legal workshop, he called on his fraternity to strive to make state institutions flourish so that they may serve the people of Pakistan. Chaudhry stressed the importance of the judiciary and the media as guardians of public interest, however, he stressed that there should be no ill-will from the struggle for his reinstatement. Pakistani editorials lauded the Chief Justice's words, but warned that his major challenge will be remaining unbiased and balanced in future cases.  3. (U) On July 31 at the launch of a new government television channel, President Musharraf reiterated his continued support for the Supreme Court's decision and his own personal support for the Chief Justice. Musharraf stressed that the executive and the judiciary must exist in harmony and work together for the national interest. The president has publicly accepted the decision of the Supreme Court graciously and has now on several occasions emphasized the freedom of the judiciary.  POLITICAL PARTIES LOOK TO SUPREME COURT FOR RELIEF --------------------------------------------- ------  4. (U) The religious parties coalition Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) filed a petition in May challenging President Musharraf's uniform. On July 29, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the petition in open court and adjudicate preliminary objections raised by the court's registrar. The MMA petition challenges President Musharraf's ability to hold the Chief of Army Staff position because he is past the military retirement age. The petition also challenges the constitutionality of President Musharraf addressing public rallies. The MMA is arguing that President Musharraf is violating the code of conduct for the military as set forth in the law and services rules.  5. (U) On July 30, Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP) petitioned the Supreme Court to extend the Political Parties Act of 1962 to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). Currently, no political party activity is allowed in the FATA, though the area has representation in both the National Assembly and the Senate. The PPP argues that these restrictions allow only religious parties to campaign in the FATA through mosques and madrassas. The petition is filed under fundamental rights and argues that true democracy must be extended to the FATA.  6. (U) On August 2, former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and his brother Shahbaz Sharif petitioned the Supreme Court to allow their return to Pakistan without being deported to Saudi Arabia. The Supreme Court convicted Nawaz Sharif on  ISLAMABAD 00003374  002 OF 002   corruption and tax evasion charges in 2000. His life sentence was commuted to exile in Saudi Arabia under an agreement with the Musharraf government and Sharif agreed not to return to Pakistan until 2010. Now, the Sharif brothers are seeking a return to Pakistan under a fundamental rights petition; they are hoping that the court will allow them to come back and lead their party in the general elections.  7. (C)  Comment:  It is impossible to predict what Pakistan's Supreme Court, which has the judicial power to inject itself into almost any issue, will do. The Supreme Court's true challenge as a newly energized institution is to remain a balanced and independent body, while avoiding over-activism that would take it into the domain of the legislative or the executive branches.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/4/2007 9:00", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003397  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS:  MARR, MASS, PREL, PK SUBJECT:  NEED TO GET IMET PROGRAM BACK ON TRACK   1. (U) This cable contains an action request -- see para 8.  2. (SBU) SUMMARY: Embassy needs help urgently in getting our IMET program back on track.  Nothing is more important to our long-term relationship in Pakistan than contact with mid-grade Pakistani military officers.  We have lost 39 students for 60 courses and half our IMET budget because of the hiatus in funding.  This marks the second year that excessive delays have caused such problems. We understand that the FY 07 funds and authority are now expected to arrive the week of August 6, over one month after the President signed the coup waiver.  We request that steps be put in place now to prevent this from happening next year.  END SUMMARY.  3. (SBU) Embassy needs assistance from Washington agencies in getting our IMET program back on track.  We have lost space for 39 students in 60 courses.  We were not allowed to spend IMET money after March 31 because of the coup waiver, the notification, and a series of other issues resulting in delays.  As a result, we have lost IMET opportunities totaling about $756,000.  We can recover and reprogram some of the lost training opportunities, but not for courses offered only once a year.  We are actively exploring options and have programmed approximately $361,000 in IMET training -- but these courses depend on seat availability.  Although we are grateful that DoD managed to find other funding for two Pakistani brigadiers to attend Senior Service Colleges, no Pakistani mid-grade officers are now attending courses in the US.  4. (SBU) The courses in which we have lost spaces run the gamut from ordnance basic officer to fuels apprentice to animal care specialist and veterinary food inspection.  In other words, these courses would have reached a broad group of Pakistani military personnel, and the training responds to the range of skills needed in a modern military force.  This is not a country in which we can simply plug an officer into the next available course: the selection process and obtaining visas require forward planning.  5. (SBU) Of the billions we are spending here, nothing is more important than the IMET program to our long-term relationship with Pakistan.  We lost an opportunity to train Pakistan military personnel during the sanctions years and as a result an entire generation of military officers (lieutenants through brigadiers) has had little contact with US Armed Forces.  As in most countries, a better trained and more efficient military will experience fewer casualties, cause less collateral damage to civilians, and have more success against terrorists.  6. (SBU) But more critically, in the case of Pakistan, the US needs to engage with these mid-level officers whom we have had no contact with for twelve years.  There has been a consistent drumbeat in the American press that these mid-level Pakistani officers are more Islamic in their outlook than their superiors.  We do not know if this claim is true, and we do not believe the press does, either. But the best way to find out and to counter these tendencies, if they exist, is to have regular American contact with them. Realistically, the Pakistan armed forces will play a major role in this society for decades to come.  And, to state the obvious, an officer with US training will develop friendships with his fellow students, both American and third country, and will better understand American values and our open society, which will be useful in times of crisis.  7. (SBU) We understand the President signed the \"coup waiver\" June 29 and then a decision was made to renotify this widely supported program.  The notification went forward a month later.  8. (SBU) ACTION REQUEST:  We urge that procedures be put in place now to prevent this same chain of events from taking place next year.  The second notification was a new element in implementation of the program this year.  We believe that members and staffers share our highly favorable view of the IMET program and want it to be implemented smoothly. We would urge Washington agencies to reach out to relevant staffers and ask if we can proceed to implement the program while the notification is either in process and/or pending. END ACTION REQUEST.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/6/2007 3:48", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003399  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, KWMN, PK SUBJECT: WOMEN'S DEVELOPMENT MINISTER TELLS AMBASSADOR: NEED TO HELP WOMEN WITHOUT BECOMING TOO LIBERAL  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: In a cordial, hour-long meeting on July 18, Women's Development Minister Sumaira Malik talked to the Ambassador about the after-effects of the Red Mosque operation, internal politics, new draft women's legislation, and her ideas for U.S. assistance programs to assist Pakistan's women. End Summary.  --------------------------------------------- ----- After the Red Mosque: Parents Will Think Twice Before Sending Their Children to Religious Schools --------------------------------------------- -----  2. (C) Malik staunchly defended the government operation against the militants at the Red Mosque earlier this month. Most parents had told her they sent their children to madrassas (religious schools) to learn how to read the Koran, not to be exposed to guns and oppose the government. The government is benefitting from this wake-up call and should use it as an opportunity to encourage parents to pull their children out of militant madrassas, she said.  ----------------------------------------- Women's Legislation: \"Too Much Liberalism Will Ruin The President's Agenda\" -----------------------------------------  3. (C) Malik said that one of her primary goals is to lessen the influence of maulvis (religious leaders) and bring education to Pakistan's population.  Liberal political parties, like the Pakistan People's Party, are not in touch with \"ground realities.\"  Left on their own, their liberal political agenda is too extreme for the average Pakistani voter, who tend to conflate modernization with westernization and reject both. The government's approach with the Women's Protection Bill was successful because it took a middle path, she said.  4. (C) Next on the legislative agenda is inheritance law.  If passed, the new law would make inheritance transfers to women automatic after the death of their husbands, which would encourage women to claim what they are entitled to, Malik said.  --------------------------------------------- Help Us With Women's Centers, Police Stations To Mitigate Violence Against Women ---------------------------------------------  5. (C) Malik said that the rate of domestic violence in Pakistan is high, but when women are able to contribute financially to the household, these dynamics change.  One of the things her ministry is trying to develop in each district are women's centers that provide basic support and skills training.  Skills training and possibly counseling could go a long way toward addressing violence against women. Legislation criminalizing domestic violence is necessary, but the government would \"need to be careful\" in how they crafted it. Another priority for helping women who are victims of violence is the developmemt of women's police centers. (Note: USAID has been working with the Ministry for the last two years and is planning to provide technical support to the Ministry of Interior's Gender Crimes Cell. End Note.) PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/6/2007 11:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003424  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S CONTROVERSIAL NEW ATTORNEY GENERAL   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: By offering to resign, Pakistan's Attoreny General became the only cabinet member to take the blame for the Chief Justice debacle.   But his replacement, Malik Qayyum, has a checkered history and is already proving controversial.  Qayyum was the presiding judge in the 1999 conviction of Benazir Bhutto, represented Shahbaz Sharif in his 2003 petition to return without facing deportation and most recently was the most vocal member of Musharraf's defense team on the Chief Justice case.  As the official who represents the government before the Supreme Court, Qayyum will face growing pressure to deal with judicial appeals on everything from the composition of voter lists to cases challenging Musharraf's right to govern.  But allegations of corruption and a poor record of supporting judicial independence are likely to weaken his effectiveness.  End Summary.  -------------------------------------------- Khan Resigns, Citing Need for Accountability --------------------------------------------  2. (U) On July 28, Attorney General Makhdoom Ali Khan submitted his resignation, citing the need for government accountability in the wake of the Chief Justice controversy. President Musharraf accepted the resignation and on August 1 appointed Malik Qayyum, a member of his defense team from the Chief Justice case, as the new Attorney General.  3. (U) After the Supreme Court reinstated Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry in July, there have been repeated calls for resignations, including those of Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, Law Minister Wasi Zafar and Attorney General Khan.  Khan is the only one to have done so.  ----------------------------------- Qayyum: A Controversial Replacement -----------------------------------  4. (C) Qayyum, the new Attorney General, is a controversial figure.  He was the presiding judge in the Accountability Court that in April 1999 convicted Pakistan People's Party Chairman Benazir Bhutto and her husband Asif Zardari for accepting kickbacks in return for awarding government contracts.  The Supreme Court ordered a retrial of the case in 2001, however, when a leaked government document indicated that Qayyum had been pressured by the Nawaz Sharif government to speed the conclusion of the case and to press for maximum punishment.  (Note: There were also accusations that in return for his cooperation, Qayyum's brother, Pervaiz Malik, was granted a ticket for a National Assembly seat and that Qayyum and his wife received diplomatic passports.  End Note.) After the accusations were made public, Qayyum was pressured to tender his resignation to the Lahore High Court and went into private practice.  In 2003, Qayyum represented Shahbaz Sharif in his petition to return to Pakistan without facing deportation.  Qayyum most recently served on President Musharraf's defense team for the Chief Justice case, where he emerged as Musharraf's most vocal advocate.  5. (U) Soon after his appointment was announced, the Pakistan Bar Council and the Supreme Court Bar Association (which Qayyum used to head) rejected it, saying that Qayyum had betrayed the lawyers' fraternity by siding with the government in the struggle for judicial independence. For its part, the Pakistan Bar Council anounced that Qayyum will not be accepted as its chair (a traditional role for Pakistan's Attorney General).  6. (C) Comment:  Both the incoming and outgoing Attorneys General can be accused of bungling the case of what admittedly was an ill-conceived idea to suspend the Chief Justice.  We will not be sorry to see Khan go, as he blocked further negotiations on the bilateral investment treaty over concerns about investor-state arbitration and other issues. However, Qayyum seems a weak choice to become Attorney General at a particularly critical time for executive-judicial relations in Pakistan. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2572", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/7/2007 9:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003434  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/07/2017 TAGS: PGOV, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: NEW NATIONWIDE POLL SHOWS DIMINISHED SUPPORT FOR MUSHARRAF  REF: ISLAMABAD 2572  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The results of a new nationwide poll show a 20 percent drop in support for President Musharraf's job performance since February -- from 54 percent to 34 percent. Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Chairman Benazir Bhutto's popularity continued to grow steadily, and she emerged as the country's most popular leader.  Leaders from Pakistan's other secular opposition parties also posted significant gains. While presidential elections are indirect (it is up to the Senate, National and Provincial Assemblies to vote for President), Musharraf's flagging approval ratings will likely dictate increased political maneuvering among candidates who plan to run in upcoming general elections.  The new poll shows strong disapproval of the current ruling alliance, but a plurality of Pakistanis would support a new coalition between Musharraf's ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) and Benazir Bhutto's PPP, especially if President Musharraf removes his uniform.  End Summary.  ------------------------------------ Public Approval for Musharraf is Low ------------------------------------  2. (U) In a nationwide poll of 4000 respondents conducted by the International Republican Institute (IRI) between June 12 and July 3, only 34 percent of Pakistanis said they approved of President Musharraf.  This represents a 20 percent drop from the last nationwide poll, conducted in February. (Note: Musharraf's approval ratings have dropped steadily since September 2006; however, a majority of respondents still approved of Musharraf's performance in February. End Note.)  3. (U) The most significant drop in approval was in the southern province of Sindh (25 point drop to 38 percent), followed closely by Punjab (23 point drop to 31 percent) and Balochistan (22 point drop to 39 percent). The Northwest Frontier Province held steadiest in its approval rating with a four percent drop to 36 percent.  4. (U) Sixty-three percent of respondents believed that President Musharraf should resign and 59 percent believed that elections would not be free and fair if Musharraf is still in uniform.  Seventy-eight percent of respondents disagreed with Musharraf's declaration that exiled political leaders would not be allowed to return to Pakistan to participate in elections.  ------------------------------ Support for Secular Opposition Politicians is Growing ------------------------------  5. (U) When respondents were asked which leader they thought can best handle the problems facing Pakistan, PPP Chairman Benazir Bhutto beat President Musharraf -- with 32 percent of respondents -- for the first time since IRI's latest round of nationwide polling began in June 2006.  Musharraf came in second at 27 percent, dropping from a 32 percent high in February.  Support for other leading secular opposition parties has also been growing: exiled Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) leader Nawaz Sharif came in third with a 21 percent approval rating (a six percent increase from February), and Pakistan Tehrik-e-Insaaf leader (and former cricket star) Imran Khan came in fourth at six percent (a six percent increase since February).  Support for ruling coalition partner Altaf Hussain, leader-in-exile of the Muttahida Qoumi Movement (MQM) bottomed out the losers: Hussain, together with Jamaat-Islami leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam leader Fazlur Rehman have shown no real improvement in support, and all hover below five percent.  ------------------------------------------ Decreased Support for Musharraf Translates to New Feelings About Ruling Coalitions ------------------------------------------  6. (U) President Musharraf's ruling PML did not suffer Musharraf's fate in the poll. While support for secular  ISLAMABAD 00003434  002 OF 002   opposition parties continued to grow steadily, the PML suffered only a one point drop -- from 24 percent to 23 percent.  Support for ruling coalition partner MQM stayed steady at two percent. (Note: Opposition secular parties benefitted from the marked decrease in the number of \"don't know/no response\" answers. End Note.)  For the first time, respondents also voiced very strong negative opinions about the PML-MQM ruling coalition: 67 percent said that the two parties should not keep their ruling alliance.  (Note: Most respondents blamed the government and the MQM for the outbreak of violence in Karachi in May, and 89 percent agreed that there should be an investigation into the incident and those responsible should be punished. End Note.)  7. (U) Of existing coalitions, respondents favored a PPP-PML-N more than any other (47 percent). The current ruling coalition (PML-MQM) tied for last place (seven percent) with the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal coalition of religious parties.  When asked about the formation of new coalitions, respondents favored a PPP-PML team more (at 42 percent) than any other.  8. (U) Clear majorities of both Pakistan Muslim League and Pakistan People's Party respondents favored a \"deal\" between President Musharraf and PPP Chairman Benazir Bhutto (58 percent of PML and 63 percent of PPP members).  When asked in more detail, it was clear that support for a \"deal\" increased in both parties if Musharraf resigned from the Army and Bhutto was allowed to return to Pakistan before Parliamentary elections (vice Musharraf remaining in uniform and Bhutto returning after Parliamentary elections).  --------------------------------------------- --- Will Poll Results Predict Politicians' Behavior? --------------------------------------------- ---  9. (C) Comment: The poll results appear to confirm a May IRI poll from urban Punjab (reftel) and what many of President Musharraf's political advisors have been telling him for months: Musharraf paid a heavy political price for Chief Justice's suspension in March and the outbreak of violence in Karachi in May.  Since Musharraf's electoral fate will be determined by the members of Pakistan's Senate, National and Provincial Assemblies, however, there is no direct correlation between public opinion and Musharraf's prospects for re-election. End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/8/2007 12:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 003476  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PK, PREL, PGOV SUBJECT: FATA STRATEGY UPDATE: AUGUST 8, 2007  1.  (U) Summary:  Embassy is beginning biweekly snapshot reporting on implementation of the FATA Development Program.  Embassy appreciates Washington's support for the FATA initiative, which will require coordination among a number of agencies and funding spigots.  These cables will provide detail on implementation of development, security, and infrastructure programs, and highlight issues for Washington's action and attention.  Rapid implementation, both here and in Washington, will be key to the overall success of our efforts, particularly in training local security forces and in generating employment.  Two urgent issues for the attention of Washington agencies are notification of USAID's $85 million in FY 07 - we are trying to begin capacity building and employment generation programs as soon as possible after the first of the year - and funding for the Frontier Corps and other security forces.  End Summary.  2.  (U) This is the first in a series of biweekly snapshot cables on implementation of the FATA Development Program.  We believe that this program has wide support in Washington and on the Hill; at the same time, we recognize and appreciate that a number of members are skeptical about our ability to monitor these programs.  We are working to meet these challenges, but issues of Pakistani oversight and coordination will continue to demand our and Washington's attention.  Subsequent cables will address implementing challenges and describe in more depth topics such as the nature of the security forces present in the tribal areas.  Development: Finalizing Bids ----------------------------  3.  (U) USAID received $88 million in FY 07 supplemental funds and has redirected $16 million from existing programs. We understand that the congressional notification for the $88 million is still pending.  4.  (U) USAID has finalized a bid document to solicit proposals from implementing partners for a FATA Capacity Building Program.  Given the lack of capacity among Government of Pakistan implementing partners such as the FATA Secretariat and FATA Development Authority, the Program will  SIPDIS be a primary focus of our efforts in 2007 and 2008.  The Program will devote approximately $60 million to capacity building over four years; $15 million will be utilized in FY 07.  The Mission expects to begin the procurement process on or about August 15 and have a contractor selected by December 2007.  5.  (U) USAID anticipates finalizing a second bid document for a FATA Livelihood Development Program by mid-September. The Livelihood Program will be funded at $25 million in FY 07 and will focus on employment generation and skills development (key areas given the numbers of unemployed youth in FATA), agriculture, natural resource management, trade, and business development.  A contractor should be selected by January 2008.  6.  (U) In education programming, USAID is currently finalizing contractor selection for the existing ED-Links Program, which has a significant FATA component and will focus on teacher education, improved learning environments, and governance reforms.  USAID is also drafting a third contracting document for its Partnership for Better Schools Program.  The bid documents for this program should be finalized in October, and we expect the program to begin in March 2008.  7.  (U) A three-person team from USAID's Office of Transition Initiatives, which originally visited in June, was in Pakistan the past two weeks to develop specific program proposals for possible employment, consultative, and communications initiatives.  The team will produce a paper in the coming weeks outlining these proposals.  Security: Building Pakistan's security forces' capacity --------------------------------------------- ----------  8.  (U) There was a U.S.-Pakistan Military Cooperation Committee (MCC) July 31-August 1 to finalize the U.S.-Pak Security Development Plan, a five-year plan to enhance the  ISLAMABAD 00003476  002 OF 003   capability of FATA's security forces and Pakistan Army counter-terrorist operations.  The Mission was represented by the DCM, USAID, DEA, NAS, and ODRP, and the U.S. delegation was chaired by the J5, U.S. Central Command.  9.  (U) The Security Development Plan will establish a Frontier Corps Training Center at Warsak, NWFP to train up to 650 persons per training cycle; provide much-needed vehicles and equipment for 8 new Frontier Corps wings (approximately 6,000 persons); offer U.S.-Pak training in intelligence, leadership, and advanced combat.  The contract for the construction of a new headquarters and training center for the Frontier Corps at Warsak should be awarded no later than mid-September.  10. (U) Levy Training and Equipment:  Thanks in part to U.S. training efforts in 2006-2007, 3,500 new Levies (tribal police) recently began duty in three FATA agencies.  The Embassy's Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) will spend $5 million in fiscal year 2007 supplemental money to equip these new police with radios and vehicles, and $2 million to initiate a 2007 surge in training.  11.  (U) Regarding training of FATA security forces, Mission is concerned about the lack of clarity concerning out-year funding for the Frontier Corps.  Frontier Corps train and equip requirements are estimated to be about $300 million over the next five years.  The equipping and training of this force is key to the success of the overall FATA strategy; these soldiers are native to the FATA and more welcome to the people than the Pakistan military.  Frontier Corps support of development projects and long-term law and order will be critical to rendering FATA inhospitable to terrorists and extremists.  They have also been instrumental in narcotics seizures, particularly in Balochistan across from Helmand province.  The initial $34.7 million for infrastructure, mobility, communications and training the Frontier Corps will come from Defense Department Counter Narcotics funds.  One option would be for the Department to request that $30 million of the FMF in the pending FY 08 budget be converted to INCLE funds.   We know that the bill has already passed the House but believe that relevant committees would be amenable to this change of labeling in a conference committee.  12.  (U) Alternatively, we would welcome 1206 authorities to provide $64 million for the Frontier Corps in 2008.  (We understand this depends on approval of legislative language that permits use of 1206 funds for the Frontier Corps.)  To avoid stop-gap measures, the Mission proposes equipment requirements be supported through Foreign Military Financing beginning in 2010, and that training remain an interagency effort.  The current uncertainty makes it difficult for NAS, which has traditionally been responsible for training and equipping the Frontier Corps, to plan its future budgets.  Infrastructure: Reprogramming; land dispute; partnerships --------------------------------------------- ------------  13.  (U) Embassy's NAS section recently determined the FATA Secretariat was not ready to take on full road construction  SIPDIS funding and asked that $20 million in FY 2007 supplemental money (which was originally budgeted for road construction) be utilized for other projects:  14.  (U) NAS will spend $5 million on capacity building for the FATA Secretariat's Construction Unit to ensure it is prepared to begin road construction in 2008.  USAID will provide $10 million in non-project assistance for contracts to the Construction Unit to support NAS' capacity building effort.  15.  (U) Levy Training and Equipment:  NAS will spend $5 million in FY07 supplemental money to build a new Levy Training Center in Jamrud, Khyber Agency.  In addition, NAS has an ongoing project to construct a temporary Levy Training Center with pre-fabricated materials.  Work on the temporary facility has stopped, pending the resolution of a tribal land dispute over who would receive compensation from the government for a newly purchased site adjacent to the Levy Training Center site.  Consulate Peshawar and the DCM have met with FATA Secretariat Officials, who gave assurances the land dispute would be resolved shortly.  ISLAMABAD 00003476  003 OF 003    16.  (U) NAS has also engaged with the British Embassy and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to discuss border security projects.  UNODC is preparing three separate border management projects (for Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iran) that include support for capacity building, inter-agency cooperation, and cross-border cooperation.  Pakistani partners will include the Frontier Corps, the Anti-Narcotics Force, Coast Guard, and Customs. In addition to partnering with us on security assistance to the Frontier Corps, the British are helping the FATA Secretariat with technical assistance on border security  SIPDIS programs.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3128", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/8/2007 12:37", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003477  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF REAFFIRMS INTENT TO SEEK RE-ELECTION IN UNIFORM BEFORE CURRENT ASSEMBLIES  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3128       B. ISLAMABAD 3424  1. (U) In public remarks August, 6, President Musharraf retierated his intention to run for re-election, in uniform, and before the current assembles. He indicated he did not believe the Connstitution would bar him from contesting the presidential election for a second term.  He again asserted that present assemblies would not be dissolved before expiration of their term (November 15) and that the presidential election would be held between September 15 and October 15.  New Attorney General Malik Qayyum also made his first public statement on the issue on August 6. Qayyum asserted \"there is no constitutional or legal hindrance which could obstruct the re-election of the president in uniform from the present legislature.\"  2.  (SBU)  This is essentially what Musharraf announced during an interview with editors July 18.  It indicates that publicly he is not backing down because of already filed or expected petitions to the Supreme Court that challenge his right to be reelected in uniform. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/13/2007 7:01", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003534  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/11/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF AND SENATOR DURBIN DISCUSS WAR ON TERROR, EXTREMISM   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Senator Durbin called on President Musharraf August 7 to discuss Pakistan's role in the war on terror, the state of Islamic extremism in Pakistan, relations with the U.S., and education in Pakistan, particularly in religious schools.  Senator Durbin recognized Pakistan had been America's strong partner in the war on terrorism but outlined concerns in the U.S. about extremists in Pakistan's tribal areas, particularly noting the increase in attacks on the Afghan border.  Senator Durbin strongly condemned the statements of Congressman Tom Tancredo.  Musharraf admitted that the arrangement with the tribes had collapsed but defended the actions of Pakistan's military, particularly its recent attacks in Mir Ali.  He said his security forces were taking heavy losses, even though the anti-terrorism effort was not popular in parts of Pakistan.  Musharraf expressed his concern about recent legislation in the Congress which would \"condition\" assistance to Pakistan.  He updated Senator Durbin on girls' education and reform of the religious schools.  End summary.  2. (C) Senator Richard Durbin, accompanied by the Ambassador, and two members of Senator Durbin's staff, Christopher Homan and Paul Farnan, called on President Musharraf at Army House in Karachi August 7.  Senator Durbin recalled that he had first met President Musharraf in 2002 and had also had the pleasure of meeting the President's brother, a long-time doctor in Chicago.  3. (C) Senator Durbin praised Pakistan's role as a U.S. partner in the war on terror.  He had observed there was considerable political turmoil with the upcoming debate in the Pakistani assembly about foreign policy and relations with the U.S.  President Musharraf replied that some of this turmoil had been triggered by the criticism of Pakistan in the National Intelligence Estimate as well as by statements about unilateral military strikes in Pakistan.  Senator Durbin said there was concern in the U.S. Congress about a resurgence of extremism in the tribal areas and particularly about the increase in cross-border attacks against NATO (read American) forces in Afghanistan.  Senator Durbin strongly condemned Congressman Tom Tancredo's irresponsible statements about the possibility of an attack on Islam's holy cities.  4. (C) Musharraf observed that while he could understand the \"political overtones\" of such statements in the U.S., they were badly received in Pakistan.   He was satisfied with the Pakistani Army's efforts against terrorism.  Musharraf said he did not understand why parts of Pakistan were called \"safe havens\" in the U.S. whereas \"hideouts\" would be a better description.  Senator Durbin noted that the decision to rely on negotiations with tribal leaders to defeat extremism had not been successful and had apparently allowed extremists to regroup.  Musharraf readily admitted that the agreement had failed but said he had been trying to minimize loss of life.   5. (S) Musharraf said the Army was being more proactive after the collapse of the tribal deal, but he was still trying to wean the population away from the extremists.  The strategy in the tribal areas needed a combination of carrots and sticks.   The Army had successfully targeted the Uzbeks, surrounded Mir Ali and also moved against specific extremists.  Musharraf said the Pakistani Army had not yet encountered a target so important that the Pakistani Army could not handle it, but there were instances where the U.S. and Pakistan had attacked a target \"together.\"  Senator Durbin asked if they were taking all efforts to identify targets and act against them and invited the Ambassador to describe the help the USG might provide.  In response, the Ambassador asked President Musharraf to receive Admiral Eric Olson, Commander of Special Operations Command (SOCOM), who would explain to him what specific types of support the U.S. might have available.  Musharraf said he would be pleased to receive Admiral Olson and was always ready to cooperate more closely with the U.S.  6. (C) Senator Durbin asked if the Pakistani people drew a distinction between al-Qaeda and the Taliban.  President Musharraf said they did.  He said that some of the religious parties had a considerable following within the tribal areas,  ISLAMABAD 00003534  002 OF 002   such as Fazlur Rehman with Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F), who has influence with the Taliban.  He noted that some of the unrest was now spreading into the settled areas.  7. (C) Senator Durbin said he had heard discussion in Pakistan about negotiating with the Taliban, a proposal he certainly did not understand.  Musharraf said there was a belief in Pakistan that this should be done by the Afghans. He said he was going to attend the Jirga in Afghanistan next week.  He recounted the history of the Afghan war against the Soviets, which \"had polluted our tribal agencies\" with extremists.  He said that the Taliban were entirely an Afghan phenomenon and originally had nothing to do with Pakistan. Now Pakistan was paying the price.  8. (C) Senator Durbin asked what kind of progress had been made in education, noting that investments in health and education were critical.  Senator Durbin said he had met the Minister of Womens Affairs, Sumaira Malik, the night before and she was a very good representative of Pakistan.  Senator Durbin said that he always evaluated a country by how they treated their women and he asked about the status of girls education.  Musharraf replied that his government had passed the Womens' Protection Bill, the first legislation in years to move forward the rights of women.  9. (C) Musharraf said the government had enjoyed \"partial success\" against the religious schools.  Not only had the Red Mosque and its associated religious school located in the center of Islamabad been shut down, but the government had also uncovered and closed another extremist mosque and religious school in an affluent area of the capital.  They had banned foreign students from the religious schools and were moving forward to make the curriculum entirely transparent.  There was also an ongoing debate with the religious \"school boards\" about examining the students.  The government was planning to increase the number of schools at which the government would pay for room and board for girls and boys, since most students attended religious schools out of economic necessity.  President Musharraf said these schools were surprisingly drawing girls in even the most conservative areas of the country.  10. (C) President Musharraf in closing indicated his concern about the recent legislation (H.R. 1) which would condition Pakistan's assistance.  (Comment:  This legislation is widely misunderstood and incorrectly compared to the far more draconian Pressler amendment.)  He said that Pakistan was fully committed to the war on terror and did not permit sanctuaries for terrorists.  11. (U) This cable was drafted after Senator Durbin departed Pakistan and he did not clear it.   BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3694", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/23/2007 13:43", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 003694  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/TPP, EB/IFD/OIA, AND EB/IFD/OMA USAID FOR ANE MWARD TREASURY FOR OSSA COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA MANILA PASS USED AT ADB STATE PASS USTR FOR RGERBER, DHARTWICK  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS:  EFIN ECON EINV PREL PK SUBJECT: Will Pakistan's growth continue  REF:  Islamabad 3654  INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY  1. (SBU)  Pakistan is in its fifth year of seven percent economic growth, but a number of international and private sector observers in Islamabad and Karachi question whether this growth is sustainable without additional reforms and a clear path through the election season. This cable is based on a series of meetings with GOP Economic Adviser, Ashfaque Hasan Khan; IMF Resident Representative, Henri Lorie; Asian Development Bank Country Director, Peter Fedon; Citibank representatives; Standard Chartered Bank Chief Executive Badar Kazmi; and the World Bank team to discuss economic developments in Pakistan following the July release of the FY07 economic growth and trade statistics.  2.  (SBU)  The domestic consumption boom led economic growth over the past year, resulting in a large import bill and growing trade deficit.  Many of our interlocutors questioned whether this growth pattern is sustainable over the long-term.  While Pakistan's economic performance is widely commended, particularly the record levels of foreign investment and remittances, the ADB and the IMF both question whether Pakistan can achieve the ambitious 10-11 percent growth GOP Medium Term Plan target.  We share their observations, particularly given Pakistan's current relatively low investment levels. All observers cited infrastructure problems, low skill levels, export concentration in few commodities, lack of opportunity for small and medium enterprises and energy shortages as major obstacles to increased (and even continued) growth.  Everybody is watching to the current political and security situation as well as the choppiness in the international financial markets to see the effects on incoming investment, domestic investment decisions, and economic growth.   End introduction and summary.  CONSUMPTION-LED GROWTH ATTRACTIVE TO FOREIGN INVESTORS  3.  (SBU)  Private consumption expenditures grew 13.8 percent in nominal terms in FY07 over FY06. Consumer expenditures alone made up close to 75 percent of the Gross Domestic Product, while investment expenditures accounted for only 21 percent of the GDP in FY07. Purchases of durable consumer goods (particularly electronics and automobiles) have grown considerably over the past few years, with the growth of the purchasing power of the middle class.  Pakistan's consumption-led growth story is unique in Asia, and has attracted significant interest from overseas investors. $8.4 billion in foreign investment flowed in FY07, compared to $4.48 billion in FY06.  4.  (SBU)  Private sector inflows and foreign purchases of global depository receipts from the privatization of the Oil and Gas Development Company Ltd (worth $730 million) and United Bank Ltd (worth $650 million) accounted for the majority of inflows.  The IMF Rep told us that non-privatization related FDI exceeded $4.8 billion.  Remittances were also at a record high $5.4 billion. The U.S has been the biggest source of remittances; Pakistanis living in U.S sent $1.45 billion in remittances, up 17.4 percent from the previous year. Saudi Arabia with $1.02 billion and UAE with $866 million are other major sources. The capital flight problem that plagued Pakistan in the 1990s does not exist in any significant way now.  In addition, services -- especially banking and telecom sectors -- performed exceptionally well while construction activity also spiked.  5.  (SBU)  Not surprisingly, Pakistan's balance of payment surplus nearly tripled, from $1.3 billion in FY06 to $3.5 billion in FY07. Large foreign flows have generated rupee liquidity in the system; the State Bank Pakistan has tightened credit, increased bank ratios, and performed more frequent open market operations to keep inflation under 8 percent.  According to State Bank of Pakistan, Net Foreign Assets (NFA) of the banking sector rose by 30 percent, which resulted in money supply growth of 16.7 percent.  EXPORTS SLOWDOWN PUZZLING   ISLAMABAD 00003694  002 OF 004   6.  (SBU)  Exports grew only 3.4 percent in FY07 (compared to 13.8 percent in FY06) to $17 billion while imports increased by 6.8 percent to $30.5 billion. Pakistan posted a record trade deficit of $13.5 billion due to slow down in exports.  Dr. Ashfaque Hasan Khan, the Economic Adviser to GOP, explained that the slowdown in exports has been sudden and abrupt. He attributed the slow growth in exports to the government's decision to end the export refunds and rebates programs.  He suspected that many refunds were falsified, and the exporters counted them as export proceeds. Elimination of rebates has led to a smaller but in his view, more realistic export number. Mr. Khan, however, said that some part of slower growth in exports can be attributed to market access problems in European Union pointing to preferential treatment granted to Bangladesh and India, two of Pakistan's primary textile export competitors. State Bank of Pakistan Governor Shamshad Akhtar commented that the GOP cannot subsidize its textile industry to the same extent as India and China, and that Pakistan is losing market share as a result. The IMF Resident Representative said that slowdown in exports can also be attributed to domestic consumption boom that has left lesser exportable surplus.  RESERVES GROW, DESPITE LARGE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT - THANKS TO FOREIGN INFLOWS  7.  (SBU)  As a result of consumption-led growth, Pakistan's current account deficit increased 41 percent in FY07 and now stands at $7.0 billion or 4.8 percent of GDP.  Thanks to the strong foreign inflows, however, reserves grew $2.5 billion in FY07, from $10.7 billion to $13.3 billion. The growth in reserves protected the rupee from depreciation -- it lost only one percent in nominal terms against the U.S dollar in FY07.  (Comment:  We are watching carefully to see to what extent the GOP can continue to finance its current account deficit through foreign inflows.  The majority of the financial experts we met are concerned that the government cannot continue to depend in the long term on foreign inflows to finance its current account deficit.  Several pointed out that \"Pakistan is not the United States -- it is not an engine of world economic growth and the rupee is not a world currency.\"  End comment.)  HIGH INFLATION STILL A RISK  8.  (SBU)  Core (non-food/non-oil) inflation slowed to 5.5 percent in FY07, down from 7.1 percent last year.   Overall inflation, however, remained at 7.8 percent, driven by food inflation (up 10.3 percent year-over-year).  Food prices increased because of higher international lentil and cooking oil prices, and the high international price of wheat and corn also affected domestic prices for these two commodities, driving up Pakistan's overall inflation rate.  Citibank commented that the growing use of grains to make bio fuels, such as ethanol, contributes to tight international supplies, affecting Pakistan because it must import cooking oil to meet the domestic demand.  9.  (SBU)  Pakistan has failed to capitalize on the global agriculture price run-up despite bumper crops of wheat and maize. While Pakistan's wheat production increased 10.5 percent year over year, the GOP recently imposed a wheat export ban to curb rising domestic prices. According to Khadim Ali Shah Bukhari at the Karachi-based Brokerage House, this decision will divert $450-500 million in exports to the local market.   Despite its service-based economy, 70 percent of Pakistanis still live in rural areas, and agriculture employs 43 percent of the labor force.  10.  (SBU)  According to Bukhari, the summer floods will not contribute to further food inflation since the Punjabi breadbasket, which feeds approximately 75 percent of Pakistan, has been spared floods and heavy rainfalls. However, disruption due to heavy rains has disrupted food supply to Sindh and Baluchistan, temporarily increasing food inflation in these areas.  SERVICES SECTOR DWARFS MANUFACTURING  11.  (SBU)  Pakistan's services sector has overtaken both  ISLAMABAD 00003694  003 OF 004   agriculture and manufacturing with more than a 53 percent GDP share, while manufacturing sector only has a 19 percent share.   Foreign direct investment inflows have mostly been confined to the services sector, with only 0.5 percent going to the manufacturing sector. Citibank Country Manager Aziz Rahman commented that Pakistan appears to have skipped over the manufacturing step in the economic development progression.  12.  (SBU)  The manufacturing sector grew 8.8 percent, falling short of its target of 12.5 percent due to overall lack of competitiveness.  The textile sector, which accounts for 25 percent of the large scale manufacturing sector and 60 percent of export earnings, is dominated by family groups. There is general lack of corporate culture in the manufacturing sector, which has restricted dynamism and reduced competitiveness. In addition, Pakistan's low skill levels were pointed out by nearly everyone we spoke with as an impediment to further growth.  SECOND GENERATION REFORMS ESSENTIAL FOR CONTINUED GROWTH  13.  (SBU)  Sustained 7 percent growth much less the 10-11 percent growth the GOP seeks to make real inroads on poverty reduction, however, depends on implementation of second generation reforms and growth in the energy supply. The ADB believes that the GOP target is not possible with the current investment levels, currently 23 percent of GDP (as compared to 40 percent in China and around 30 percent in India), and that GOP predictions that the private sector will make 80 percent of this investment are ambitious.    The ADB told us that given the composition of Pakistan's private sector and its traditional reluctance to invest here, it is not likely invest at this level. In addition, macroeconomic imbalances such as large current account deficit and Pakistan's lack of industrial diversification also make higher growth rates more difficult. The International Monetary Fund ResRep shared ADB's view. Standard Chartered Bank Pakistan's Executive Director, Badar Kazmi, however, related his experience that Pakistanis are more likely to invest at home today than at any time in the past; post-9/11, they are seeing a good return on their investment.  His bank is also putting significant resources into developing its small and medium enterprise sector.  WATCHING TO HOW THE CURRENT SITUATION AFFECTS INVESTMENT  14.  (SBU) The GOP economists, IFI reps and banking sector are all monitoring the current political and security situation carefully as Pakistan heads into its election season to see how investment and growth are affected.  The World Bank sources said that it is very hard to get the real sense of economic fallout of the recent law and order problems and suicide attacks in Pakistan. They are watching to see whether this is a passing phase.  The Citibank sources said that the risk premium on Pakistani bonds rose in the international capital markets due to recent suicide attacks in Pakistan. However, global investors will be looking at Pakistan as an investment opportunity due to good spreads. No matter what happens, it will always be less expensive to invest here rather than India or other Asian countries.  Standard Chartered Bank's Kazmi remarked that \"the picture over the next three to six months is blurred\" but has confidence in the medium-term outlook.  15.  (SBU)  The Karachi Stock Exchange gained 37.9 percent during the FY07. There has, however, been a decline of 11.8 percent in the Karachi 100 Index while market capitalization dropped by 13.7 percent or $8.46 billion since July 13, 2007. Foreign selling has triggered the drop in Karachi Stock Exchange as there has been a net outflow of $53.9 million during the last one month.  (reftel)  COMMENT  16.  (SBU)  Over the medium term, Pakistan's economy has done exceeding well. Per capita income grew at an average rate of 13 percent during the last five years.  There has also been progress on the poverty front, even as the exact numbers are debated.  Social indicators, including primary school enrollment and immunization, also improved by 44 percent and 43 percent respectively over the  ISLAMABAD 00003694  004 OF 004   last five years. International debt reduction has allowed federal and provincial spending to double between 2003 and 2007.  We are watching the current political and security situation as well as the choppiness in the international financial markets to see the magnitude of the effect on incoming investment, domestic investment decisions, and economic growth.  17.  (SBU)  There is a general perception that it will be very difficult for any political party to reverse the reform process in Pakistan. The media has become increasingly independent, and middle class spending in particular has fueled much of the current growth. However, the remainder of the current government and certainly the new government must address the structural issues -- lack of competitiveness, export concentration in few areas, low skill levels, insufficient infrastructure, dependence on foreign inflows to finance the trade deficit, and lack of investment in the energy sector - which prevent the China-style growth necessary to grow Pakistan's middle class.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3692", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/24/2007 11:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003706  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/24/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: A DAY AFTER THE NAWAZ VERDICT  REF: ISLAMABAD 3692  Classified By: Charge Peter Bodde, for reasons 1.4  (b), (d)   1. (SBU) The Supreme Court's August 23 ruling in favor of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has been lauded by Nawaz supporters and opposition parties as another sign of an independent judiciary standing up for democratic rights. People celebrated in the streets in Islamabad and in other Punjabi cities after the announcement of the verdict. There have been no large-scale demonstrations or street movements following initial public celebrations; Islamabad and all other major cities remain quiet.  2. (SBU) The court released a very short order citing the right of freedom of movement under Article 15 of the Pakistani constitution. Its language cites a Pakistani citizen's \"inalienable right to enter and remain in (the) country\" and notes that their return \"shall not be restrained, hampered, or obstructed by the Federal or Provincial Government Agencies\". The court is expected to release a longer decision explaining its legal stance in a few weeks. The short verdict makes no mention of any other legal cases pending against Nawaz Sharif nor does it cite any of his previous convictions in Pakistani courts. Attorney General Malik Qayyum has accepted the court's decision and reaffirmed that no law restricts Nawaz Sharif's return to Pakistan. However, he has publicly said the court decision nullifies the exile deal that the government made with Sharif in 2000 and thus does not restrict the government from imposing past convictions or sentences. (Note: Nawaz Sharif was convicted in 2000 on various charges, including corruption and terrorism, for which he received a life sentenced. End Note.)  3. (C) Both President Musharraf and Nawaz Sharif have publicly called for political reconciliation. Musharraf in a televised interview, said that there is a need to forgive and forget the past and reconcile politically with Nawaz Sharif for greater national interests. Nawaz Sharif has also said he is open to reconciliation but only if President Musharraf makes clear that he is not a candidate for any political position in upcoming elections. All the major opposition political party leaders -- including Benazir Bhutto, heads of religious parties, and the nationalists -- have publicly welcomed the Supreme Court's decision. The key question remains when will Nawaz Sharif return. Sharif has expressly not stated a date. His party leaders are calling for his early return in order to challenge President Musharraf's bid for re-election under the current assemblies (which could take place as early as September 15). Sharif has only said that he will be back in Pakistan before the general elections.  4. (C) Comment: Opposition parties are welcoming the Supreme Court decision with open arms, declaring it a another victory for an independent judiciary, despite the fact that rumors of deals and accommodations with the government continue to abound. Sharif's tentative statements about the date of his return suggest he may be open to some sort of reconciliation with President Musharraf. If Sharif comes back to Pakistan after the presidential elections, he will be able to lead his party in general elections while avoiding a direct challenge to Musharraf's presidential re-election. Sharif's calculated decision on when to return will determine how his party approaches both the presidential and national elections.  End Comment.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2577", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/25/2007 5:45", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003714  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/PB AND EEB/TPP/IPE STATE PASS TO USTR DHARTWICK/TGARDE/JVIGIL JUSTICE PASS TO OPDAT BTRUEBELL/POLESEN COMMERCE FOR ITA/MAC/OSA/LDROKER/ASTERN/KRUDD COMMERCE PASS TO CLDP/TMORITZ  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EFIN, EINV, KIPR, PGOV, PK SUBJECT:  IPR LAW ENFORCEMENT  TRAINING A SUCCESS  REF:  ISLAMABAD 2577  1.  SUMMARY:  August 13-18, ECON presented the \"Intellectual Property Rights and Cyber Investigative Techniques & Resources\" law enforcement training program in Islamabad for Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) officers, provincial police, Ministry of Interior (MoI) officials, and academics on tools for conducting IPR violation investigations.  Trainers represented the FBI, DoJ, Microsoft Corporation, and International Federation of the Phonographic Industry/Motion Picture Industry of America (IFPI/MPAA).  The focus of the training was on the FIA's newly inaugurated IPR Unit consisting of 15 officers from throughout Pakistan.  The course included an overview of IPR violation investigations plus hands-on computer based training into the techniques of cyber forensics.  All attendees were highly motivated and deeply involved in the five day course which increases Pakistan's capacity to conduct more effective IPR violation investigations.  INL provided the training funds.  END SUMMMARY.  Interagency effort makes a better training program - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  2.  (U)  Providing five days of training for over thirty people in Islamabad was an inter-agency effort led by the Embassy's Economic section under an FY 06 agreement between INL and OPDAT at the Department of Justice. Plans for the training were in the works for well over a year.  The main trainer for program content was Supervisory Special Agent Kiffa Shirley of the FBI's Cyber Division, who coordinated a total of seven instructors from the FBI, DoJ, Microsoft Corporation, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI - represents the worldwide recording industry), and the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA). Shirley selected the course content to fit the needs of the officers from FIA's newly formed IPR unit in close cooperation with the Embassy's Economic section.  Diverse student body encourages multiplier effect - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  3.  (U) We selected students from a wide range of institutions to promote awareness and interest in IPR protection throughout Pakistan. 31 students received graduation certificates. The FIA provided 15 students from across Pakistan, including Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar, who form the newly inaugurated IPR Units located in each province.  The Ministry of Interior sent six police officers from Sindh and Punjab plus three participants from the National Crisis Management Cell (NCMC), a cyber group at MoI that works on many issues, including border and IPR problems.  In addition, we invited four professors nominated by the Higher Education Commission; two from the COMSATS Institute of Technology, one from Quaid-e-Azam University, and one from the University of Karachi. The higher education professors intend to use what they learned during the course in their teaching curriculum, which will provide a multiplier effect.  What the class learned - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  4.  (U)  Our goal was to make this training session as interactive as possible.  In addition to receiving an overview of national IPR legislation and its relationship with Pakistan's international IPR commitments, participants received hands-on computer training (thanks to donated space with sufficient computers for each participant) on digital investigation techniques, computer forensics, digital evidence, on-line piracy, and internet investigative tools.  Computer training was supplemented by case studies in computer forensics and modules on counterfeit investigation methodology. The links between organized crime and IPR  ISLAMABAD 00003714  002 OF 002   piracy were also detailed.  The FBI walked participants through its three year investigation that led to curbing more than $4.5 billion in illegal DVD sales, convincing the audience that IPR enforcement is just as complex and produces the same tangible results as other criminal law enforcement cases. IFPI/MPAA showed how enforcement and the private sector work together to pursue IPR violations. Participants commented on the quality and usefulness of the course content.  Combating Organized Crime - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  5.  (SBU)  During the organized crime portion of the course, FIA expressed interest in training on how to ensure that they collect evidence that can withstand court challenges.  In Pakistan, much of the IPR crimes are connected to organized crime, which can easily finance good defense lawyers.  FIA is interested in ensuring that its cases at prosecution are airtight.  As several of the presenters mentioned, organized crime has realized it can make a much larger profit margin on counterfeit and pirated goods than on drug trafficking with significantly less risk - especially when there is little IPR enforcement.  More Funding Requested - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  6.  (SBU)  ECON applied for further funding of IPR enforcement efforts earlier this year (reftel).  With a successful, multi-agency, public/private sector training program already completed, we have a number of ideas for further training to be funded from the additional $150,000 requested from INL to increase IPR enforcement capacity building in Pakistan.  We would like to focus on hands-on training for prosecution of IPR cases and to include customs personnel so that Pakistan can improve detection of pirated and counterfeit goods at the border and prosecution of these cases.  We are also looking organize a seminar on the relationship between IPR and innovation.  Given the success of this seminar, we now have commitments from Pakistani institutions to provide in-kind contributions of space and computer resources.  Comment - - - - - - -  7.  (SBU)  The success of this training was due on large part to the wide range of trainers, the combination of law enforcement and industry perspectives, and one of the most engaged group of participants this post has seen. We also highlighted the importance of sharing what they've learned with their colleagues.  Our Pakistani counterparts were extremely appreciative of the time, effort and commitment of the trainers to come to Pakistan, particularly in light of recent security concerns. We were appreciative of the cooperation of our colleagues from DOJ and FBI as well as the participation of the private sector.  Thanks to good press coverage due to the Charge's participation in the opening and closing ceremonies and TV interviews by the trainers, we were able to not just provide hands-on tools for law enforcement professionals but also raise the profile of intellectual property rights protection in Pakistan.  We look forward to organizing more of these programs in the near future.  BODDE " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/27/2007 11:48", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003738  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/TPP, EB/IFD/OIA, AND EB/IFD/OMA USAID FOR ANE MWARD TREASURY FOR OSSA COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA MANILA PASS USED AT ADB STATE PASS USTR FOR RGERBER, DHARTWICK  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS:  EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: KARACHI STOCK MARKET CONTINUES DOWNWARD SLIDE   1.  (U)  The Karachi Stock Exchange (KSE) took another dive on August 23 on rumors of the Supreme Court's imminent decision to clear the Sharif brothers return to Pakistan.  The market lost 319 points or 2.6 percent to close at 12,001 points, slightly less than its biggest one day loss on August 8 on rumors that the Government of Pakistan would declare a state of emergency.  Volume of shares traded August 23 increased 25.2 percent over the previous day. Overall market capitalization declined by nearly $1.5 billion dollars, or 2.4 percent.  2.  (U)  The KSE has lost almost 18% of its value from its 2007 mid-July high, and, unlike other exchanges, shows no signs of recovery.  In comparison, the composite of Dow Jones World Index excluding U.S. (DJWI ex. U.S.), a broad market index excluding U.S. based stocks, has begun to recover since bottoming out August 16. In August alone, the KSE has lost 12 percent of its value versus 6 percent for DJWI ex-U.S.  Over the past year, the KSE has been about twice as volatile as the Dow Jones. (Note: the DJWI ex-U.S. was used instead of the regular DJWI because the U.S. markets have seen a higher rate of recovery over the past week than the rest of the world which could skew comparisons. End Note.)  3.  (SBU) Comment:  Observers remarked that growing uncertainty over Pakistan's political future has made investors wary of making equity investments here.  This is clearly reflected in the volatility of the market here since June. The market has not bottomed out yet and, in our view, is unlikely to do so until Pakistan's political future is clearer.  End Comment. " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/27/2007 12:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003739  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PARM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN CONDUCTS SUCCESSFUL TEST OF RAAD CRUISE MISSILE  (U) On August 25 Pakistan successfully tested a new cruise missile capable of carrying nuclear weapons.  The Hatf-VIII or Raad missile has a range of approximately 220 miles.  In March, the Pakistani military tested the Hatf-VII or Babar missile which has a range of 430 miles.  Per an earlier agreement, Pakistan and India are required to notify each other before testing ballistic missiles, but are not required to do so for non-ballistic missiles. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2007 2:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003744  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/12/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S UNCERTAIN POLITICAL LANDSCAPE  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1, (C) Summary: With the anticipated return of exiled leaders Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto on the horizon, the political atmosphere in Pakistan is buzzing. Politicians of all stripes are full of nervous energy as they try to decipher the various signals from their party leadership abroad and in Pakistan. Timing remains the key question: when will Sharif and/or Bhutto return? Rumors of deals, accommodations, and reconciliations with Musharraf continue to spread, reinforced by furtive meetings both in Pakistan and abroad of key Musharraf stalwarts and opposition party leaders. The emboldened Chief Justice and the rising violence in the tribal areas add another level of complexity and uncertainty to an already anxious political scene. End Summary.   NAWAZ SHARIF ------------  2. (C) Following the 23 August Supreme Court ruling in his favor, Nawaz and Shahbaz vowed in television appearances this weekend to return \"soon.\"  Nawaz ordered his supporters to plan for his return, but there is rampant speculation on when he will actually appear.  Nawaz called his top party leaders to a meeting in London this week to consider the options. His party is enjoying some new-found popularity based on the public perception that Nawaz stood his ground and did not make a deal with Musharraf.  3. (C) But whether Nawaz's party can capitalize on this sudden popularity may depend on whether Nawaz returns before the September 15-16 presidential election.  The press reports that Musharraf this weekend echoed his Attorney General in warning that Nawaz would be arrested if he returned. Even Nawaz party stalwarts question their leader's appetite for jail.  On August 25, the Accountability Court declined to accept the GOP's bid to re-open three corruption cases against Nawaz, at least not until he actually returned to Pakistan.  But current and former justices are debating in the press whether Musharraf has the legal right to reinstate previous charges against Nawaz.  4. (C)  There was press speculation that Nawaz would buy some time by going to Saudi for Ramadan, and the Attorney General headed for Saudi Arabia today, presumably to convince the royal family to increase pressure on Nawaz.  The press also reported on a July meeting (before the court verdict) in which the son of assassinated Lebanese President Saad Hariri warned Nawaz not to return to Pakistan.  5. (C) Sharif's party leadership claims that if he returns, there will be major defections from the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (Musharraf's party).  Nawaz may have picked up support of 15-20 members of Musharraf's party, but that will not be enough to change the electoral equation in the indirect presidential election.  Even with a secret ballot, it is unlikely that a significant number of major politicians from Punjab will defect to a party that lacks strong political organization.  If Nawaz makes a deal with the government and returns after the presidential election, he will have lost significant moral capital but will still be a large boon to his party members as they campaign for the general elections.   BENAZIR BHUTTO --------------  6. (C)  Bhutto, too, has instructed her followers to prepare for her triumphant return, but they are equally in the dark about their leader's true intentions on a deal with Musharraf.  Even loyalists are at a loss to explain her strategy of negotiating on two tracks--through Musharraf's interlocutors and in the foreign press, where she is increasingly specific about her demands.  Bhutto also called all her top PPP leaders to London for emergency meetings this week.  7. (C) PPP members describe an ideal scenario in which the  ISLAMABAD 00003744  002 OF 002   current National Assembly passes a legislative package that removes the two-term limit on prime ministers, removes the requirement that a presidential candidate wait two years after leaving government office to run, and restricts the tenure of supreme court justices.  This scenario assumes that Musharraf will have taken off his uniform before the presidential elections, and it would have to be enacted in time to pre-empt a court challenge of his right to run for re-election.  Proponents believe this scenario would appeal to Bhutto, Musharraf and, to a lesser extent even to Nawaz Sharif.   MUSHARRAF ---------  8. (C) Musharraf dispatched Presidential Advisor Tariq Aziz and Presidential Chief of Staff Hamid Javaid to London for talks with Bhutto this week.  Musharraf August 25 also called for a government of \"national consensus\" to be set up after parliamentary elections, and his unofficial spokesman, Minister for Railways Sheikh Rashid, said of Bhutto that \"naturally, she would enjoy powers in the government.\"  .  9.  (C)  In a sign that party loyalists are considering their options if he does not take off the uniform, Musharraf's party was forced to extend for five days applications for party electoral slates. Musharraf's party president Chaudhry Shujaat Hussein has also busy creating alternative alliances through outreach to both the religious party leader Fazlur Rehman and even to recently released from jail Nawaz party leader Javed Hashmi.  Shujaat is concerned that Nawaz could pick up support from the religious parties, and Musharraf is seeking to split the religious block in his favor.  Bhutto, in this weekend's press, accused Shujaat of efforts to block the Musharraf-Bhutto alliance.  CHIEF JUSTICE -------------  10. (U) Meanwhile, on August 25 the Chief Justice issued a statement saying that the organs of the state must work independently and cease encroaching others' duties.  He noted that the Court was now receiving approximately 600 applications daily about human rights and public interest cases, and he urged the lower courts to reduce the caseload burden on the Supreme Court.  Musharraf also made a gesture to the court by replacing the Law Minister allegedly responsible for pushing the case against the Chief Justice   11. (C) Comment: In a Sunday editorial, the daily newspaper \"Dawn\" commented with derision that foreign powers knew more about the fate of Pakistani politics than the Pakistani people themselves.  It appears that the Chief Justice is coming to realize the need to control the wave of pent-up emotion that his reinstatement set in motion, but it is not clear that realization will help Musharraf.  The media also reported an every growing tally of violent attacks in the tribal areas, including  a video of a beheading of a Frontier Corpsman in Waziristan (septel).  Within this climate of uncertainty, there is also continued talk of a state of emergency or martial law.  We expect the political climate to remain confused and tense, at least until the presidential election.      PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07Islamabad2944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2007 12:49", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 003761  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS:  PGOV, KDEM, PK SUBJECT:  USG SUPPORT FOR PAKISTAN'S ELECTORAL PROCESS  Ref: Islamabad 2944  1.  (SBU)  Summary.  Post has been working with political parties, NGOs, donors and the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) to ensure Pakistan's upcoming elections are free, fair and credible.  We are pleased that the Pakistan Supreme Court decided to act upon a petition filed by the Pakistan People's Party to expand the voter list.  However, the methodology chosen by the ECP to implement the court order will corrupt the draft voter list completed to date with USAID assistance.   Therefore, we have decided not to agree to the ECP's request for $4.3 million to implement its flawed methodology. End Summary.  2.  (SBU)  On August 16, the Supreme Court issued a ruling on a petition filed by the Pakistan People's Party complaining that the 2007 draft voter list of 52 million names was short by an estimated 20 million names.  The Court directed the ECP to expand the voter list within 30 days without requiring the use of certified identity documents.  3.  (SBU)  The ECP has chosen to implement the court order as they believe it was intended; this involves adding names from the flawed but larger (72 million name) 2002 list to the credible 2007 draft voter list.  There will be no requirement to check for authenticated documents before adding names to the list.  4.  (SBU)  Under a contract with IFES, USAID funded computerization of the draft 2007 voter list; that work is nearly complete.   During the Court proceedings, the GOP indicated that USAID would also fund the cost of this voter list expansion. After the verdict, we received a request for approximately $4.3 million to support the ECP's flawed voter list expansion project. Post is concerned that this process will corrupt the current credible 2007 list; therefore, we have advised the ECP that USAID support for computerizing the draft voter list will end when the initial contract work is completed.  5.  (SBU)  The U.S. will continue to fund, bilaterally and through a multi-donor basket of activities, programs to provide voter education, domestic election monitoring, training for political party agents, an international observer mission, projects targeted at increasing the participation of women and rural voters, and post-election complaint adjudication.  6.  (SBU)  In total, we believe our efforts will contribute to making Pakistan's upcoming elections more free and fair than they were in 2002.   We do not want to undermine the credible work the ECP has performed to date, and we will continue to work with them in other avenues as they struggle to implement a difficult Court order to expand the voter list.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3762", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/28/2007 13:41", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003762  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/TPP, EB/IFD/OIA, AND EB/IFD/OMA USAID FOR ANE MWARD TREASURY FOR OSSA COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA MANILA PASS USED AT ADB STATE PASS USTR FOR RGERBER, DHARTWICK  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS:  EFIN, ECON, EINV, ETRD, PREL, PK SUBJECT:  MINISTRY OF COMMERCE ON BIT, ROZS AND DATA EXCLUSIVITY  1.  (U)  This is an action request.  Please see para 3.  SUMMARY - - - - - - - - -  2.  (SBU)  Econ Counselor met August 27 with Jamshid Khan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce at his request to discuss next steps  SIPDIS on the Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), GOP concerns regarding the Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs), and a possible ROZ mission to the U.S.  Econ Counselor inquired about the status of the data exclusivity legislation, which is now back at the Ministry of Health after a Ministry of Commerce review for consistency with the WTO Agreement on Trade-related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).  Raheela Tajwar, Deputy Secretary of Commerce, also participated in the meeting.  ROZs - - - -  3.  (SBU)  Khan made a pitch for inclusion of the cotton trouser categories (347 and 348) on the ROZ product list.  Econ Counselor responded that considerable effort had gone into selecting the categories to maximize the benefit to Pakistan and increase the chances that the U.S. Congress would approve the legislation.  Khan remarked that Levi Strauss was particularly interested in locating to a ROZ site to produce cotton trousers, adding that it was very likely that not all goods produced in the ROZs would be destined for the U.S.  The Levi Strauss Director of Corporate Affairs is lobbying for inclusion of the 347 and 348 categories, according to Khan.  He also questioned why the 338 and 339 categories (cotton knit shirts) were only partially covered.  ACTION REQUEST:  Post would appreciate information to respond to Khan's question.  END ACTION REQUEST.  4.  (SBU)   Khan also requested that the entire province of Balochistan be included in the legislation.  He argued that all of Balochistan has the same economic development needs as the FATA and earthquake-affected zones and also suffers from negative effects of political extremism.  5.  (SBU)  The Ministry of Commerce, in conjunction with its Hunton and Williams consultants, is starting to organize a delegation to go to Washington to lobby for ROZ passage.  Khan commented that replicating the positive impression left by the Karachi Chamber of Commerce representatives' visit to Congress and U.S. agencies would assist in passage of ROZ legislation. The Ministry is looking for business people from the designed ROZ areas who are interested in investing there and who preferably already have visas, given the lag time between approval and actual visa issuance.  Post will work with the Ministry as appropriate and apprise Washington as plans develop.  Bilateral Investment Treaty - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  6.  (SBU)  The GOP will hold an interagency meeting August 30 to discuss next steps on the BIT.  Khan identified five remaining areas where agreement has not been reached and his sense of the degree of flexibility on each side:  --  scope and coverage (Article 2).  Khan believes neither side has any flexibility here. --  transparency (Articles 11 and 20.6).  Khan believes that the U.S. has flexibility here.  Board of Investment (BOI) Secretary Mushque Malik  told us the same thing last week. --  claims on behalf of an enterprise (Article 24.6).  Khan thought the U.S. has some flexibility here, as did Malik. --  investment agreements (Article 24.1).  Khan's impression is that neither side has flexibility here. --  arbitration rules.  Khan did not comment on the GOP position here, but highlighted that the BOI negotiates on behalf of the GOP. Post will follow up on results of the August 30 meeting.  Data Exclusivity - - - - - - - - - - -  7. (SBU)  Economic Counselor recounted her August 25 meeting with the Secretary of the Ministry of Health Dr. Khushnood Akhtar Lashari who said that the data protection amendment had moved from the  ISLAMABAD 00003762  002 OF 002   Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Commerce.  Raheela Tajwar, Deputy Secretary of Commerce, said that that the Commerce Ministry WTO division had reviewed the legislation for consistency with TRIPS, but that the draft is now back at the Ministry of Health. She did not know if any changes had been made, but highlighted that this legislation would not/not be TRIPS-plus.  Both Tajwar and Khan expressed their support for this legislation.  Econ Counselor expressed interest in seeing a draft, remarking that many other countries working on data exclusivity had shared drafts with the U.S., but Tajwar and Khan did not take the bait.  8. (SBU)  Econ Counselor highlighted the importance of passage of TRIPS-consistent data exclusivity legislation for innovation and the development of life sciences industries in Pakistan as well as the key role progress (or lack thereof) on this issue will play in determining the outcome of Pakistan's out-of-cycle review.  Khan suggested writing another letter to the Ministry of Health highlighting our concerns.  Comment:  During the Ambassador's introductory calls on the Minister of Health and Commerce, they both expressed interest in seeing this legislation passed and seemed to understand the importance of securing National Assembly approval quickly.  We will continue to pursue this issue.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/29/2007 10:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003777  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTANI CHRISTIANS APPEAL TO THE SUPREME COURT   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On August 25, the Pakistan Christian National Party (PCNP) filed a petition with the Supreme Court seeking to declare as unconstitutional the requirement that the President of Pakistan be a Muslim. Christian groups and other minorities remain divided on many issues; however, all have vowed to fight against discriminatory laws and Constitutional clauses. Like an increasing number of Pakistanis, many of these minorities see the reinvigorated Supreme Court as an avenue for actual justice.  End Summary.  2. (U) PCNP Chairman Joseph Francis filed a petition in the Supreme Court challenging Article 41(2) of the Pakistani Constitution that bars non-Muslims from running for the presidency of Pakistan. Francis claims that the 1973 constitution suppressed minority rights and thus violated both the teachings of Islam and the Resolution of Pakistan (the founding document of the country). The PCNP has vowed to use the emboldened Supreme Court to challenge all discriminatory clauses in the Constitution and the Pakistani Penal Code. Joseph Francis has also announced that he would try to run for President of Pakistan. (Note: Christians form less than two percent of Pakistan's 160 million people. End Note.)  3. (U) On August 11, various minorities groups held the first \"Minority Day\" in anticipation of Pakistan's 60th anniversary. The groups called for an end to discrimination against religious and other minorities. Minority leaders hope that the encouraging judicial atmosphere will help redress many of their grievances, which include use of the blasphemy laws to pursue personal and/or financial grievances against religious minorities.  4. (C) Comment: Several clauses in the Pakistani constitution and in its Penal Code are discriminatory towards Christians and other religious minorities, however, challenges in the past have been futile. Political infighting plagues the various minority groups and many Christian groups do not support Joseph Francis, however, his petition will be a test case to see how far the court is willing to push in terms of guaranteeing civil and human rights.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3706", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/29/2007 12:39", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003779  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN SUPREME COURT: INCREASING CHALLENGES TO MUSHARRAF  REF: ISLAMABAD 3706  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: President Musharraf's troubles with the Supreme Court are multiplying even as his negotiations with Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto intensify.  On August 28, the Court agreed to hear two cases challenging Musharraf's right to seek re-election in uniform.  The newly empowered Court is calling top government officials to report on the Red Mosque military operation and is moving forward on cases filed on behalf of \"disappeared\" citizens allegedly arrested by the intelligence services.  Frustrated citizens and even North Waziristan militants are turning to the Court for judicial relief.  However, the court has yet to take a major decision to directly curb Musharraf or the military's power. The pending cases will put additional pressure on Musharraf to decide if/when he will shed his unform and show just how far the activist court is willing to go in challenging the government. End Summary.   LAWYERS CHALLENGE THE UNIFORM -----------------------------  2. (U) A seven-judge bench of the Supreme Court granted an appeal to review a two-year old verdict which allowed President Musharraf to hold two concurrent offices (President and Chief of Army Staff). The Pakistan Lawyers Forum (PLF) had filed a petition in the Supreme Court in 2005 challenging the uniform, but the verdict had been in favor of President Musharraf.  In issuing its decision the Court cited the right of parliament to amend the constitution. On August 28, the newly emboldened Supreme Court granted the PLF's appeal and will hear arguments in 10 days.  3. (SBU) The PLF appeal is being led by former justice A.K. Dogar. The appeal also asks the court to restrain Musharraf from seeking re-election by the present assemblies, to stop making deals with any political parties, and to stop acting as the de facto leader of any political party. The PLF is challenging the constitutionality of 17th Amendment and the Legal Framework Order (LFO) which allowed President Musharraf to hold both offices.   RELIGIOUS PARTY CHALLENGES THE UNIFORM --------------------------------------  4. (U) On August 29, a three-member bench of the Supreme Court decided to finally hear religious party leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed's May 2007 petition challenging President Musharraf's military tenure. The Supreme Court set aside the earlier objections of the court's registrar and has agreed to proceed with the case. Qazi's petition claims that under Army Regulations Act, President Musharraf had to retire on April 13, 2005 and that his self-extension of tenure is illegal. The petition also claims that Musharraf's election campaigning violates military regulations.   MILITANTS CHALLENGE ARMY ACTIONS ---------------------------------  5. (C) The fame of the Supreme Court has spread to the tribal areas as well. Militants from North Waziristan sent a letter to the Chief Justice and to opposition political party leaders appealing for the Supreme Court's intervention in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). The militants' letter claims that the Supreme Court is their last hope against President Musharraf and the military. They are requesting a legal team headed by the Chief Justice's own famed lawyer Aitzaz Ahsan. The militants want the court to review \"unwarranted\" military actions in North Waziristan against innocent people. However, the Pakistani constitution is explicit in that the Supreme Court does not have any jurisdiction in the FATA.  MADRASSA BOARD CHALLENGES RED MOSQUE OPERATION --------------------------------------------- -  ISLAMABAD 00003779  002 OF 002    6. (U) Wafaqul Madaris, Pakistan's largest Deobandi madrassa accreditation board, has filed a petition in the Supreme Court challenging the GOP's Red Mosque operation on July 12. In the past the madrassa board helped to represent the government in negotiations with the Red Mosque; now, the board is accusing GOP authorities of defying the agreement to resolve the Red Mosque issue peacefully. On August 28, the Supreme Court directed the Interior Secretary and the Defense Secretary to submit detailed statements within four weeks  SIPDIS justifying the operation and explaining what one justice described as \"the killing of innocent people\". Though Wafaqul Madaris' petition also names President Musharraf and the 10th Corps Commander, the court has not ordered either of them to appear.  THE \"DISAPPEARED\" -----------------  7.  (C)  Even before the reinstatement of the Chief Justice, the Court had been investigating cases of \"disappeared\" citizens allegedly arrested by the intelligence services.  On August 20, the Chief Justice summoned the Director General of the Federal Investigating Agency (FIA) to testify and threatened jail time if he could not produce a specific missing person. The individual was released the next day. Human rights lawyers representing the families of the disappeared are pressing forward to demand the release of those arrested and in at least one case are seeking civil redress.  8. (C) Comment: In a nation where many people feel that they are disempowered by corruption, lack of law and order, and secretive intelligence agencies, the Supreme Court has  SIPDIS emerged as a rallying point for justice. The Chief Justice recently observed that the Court was receiving more than 600 petitions and applications daily. Politicians, religious leaders, human rights activists, and now militants, are seeking the Court's assistance in addressing their grievances.  9. (C) The Supreme Court so far has been bold in inviting a variety of cases, and to some extent has been proactive in calling government officials to task. However, the court has yet to directly challenge the power of President Musharraf, the intelligence agencies, or the military. The decisions in these pending cases will greatly affect the upcoming presidential and general elections and will be test of the court's will. End Comment.      PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07PESHAWAR347", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/30/2007 13:08", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003796  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/22/2017 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SOUTH WAZIRISTAN'S CONTINUING MILITANCY  REF: PESHAWAR 347  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Concurrent with the much-publicized breakdown of the North Waziristan Agreement, the GOP's agreement in South Waziristan has also been faltering.  The result has been increasingly brazen militant attacks on security forces, including the recent kidnapping of 19 Frontier Corps (FC) personnel.   The conciliatory nature of the jirga assembled to negotiate for their release, the beheading of one captive, and the fact it took over two weeks to reach a deal is not a good omen for GOP control of South Waziristan.  End Summary.   2. (C) On August 28, a group of approximately 19 FC personnel and other local officials were released after being held since early August by militants in South Waziristan. (Note:  Sixteen were kidnapped on August 9, and the others were kidnapped on August 25.  End Note.)  News of the release, however, coincided with humiliating photos in all major Pakistani newspapers of the kidnapped soldiers seated while masked gunmen stood over them.  The still photos were taken from a gruesome video recently released by the kidnappers that captured the beheading of one of the FC soldiers on August 14.  3. (C) A \"peace committee\" of prominent tribal and religious leaders from the area and led by parliamentarians Maulana Merajuddin and Maulana Saleh Shah secured the group's release.  While the parliamentarians announced that the release was unconditional, local observers speculate that the GOP will quietly release ten militants whose freedom had been demanded by militant leader Baitullah Mehsud. The government has also reportedly agreed to uphold the 2005 peace agreement with the militants that stipulated no army checkpoints in South Waziristan and essentially gave local militants the responsibility for \"maintaining law and order\" in the eastern (Mehsud) areas of South Waziristan.  4. (C) Comment: The prolonged capture of GOP security personnel is emblematic of how little control the military has in South Waziristan.  Most tribal observers see the conciliatory nature of the jirga and the GOP's concessions as a victory for the Mehsud militants and the humiliating photos as a propaganda coup. Both parliamentarians Maulana Merajuddin and Maulana Saleh Shah are widely reputed to have sympathies with the militants, thus many of the other jirga members expressed disgust with the process.  By Pashtun tradition, the gruesome beheading of one of the FC men and humiliating treatment of the security personnel demanded a strong response from the government.  The weak response will likely embolden them to continue attacking government forces in the tribal areas and adjacent settled districts of the Northwest Frontier Province. End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3276", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "8/31/2007 12:58", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003811  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/12/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: CONCERNS ABOUT JALOZAI REFUGEE CAMP CLOSING  REF: ISLAMABAD 3276  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1.  (C) Summary: In separate meetings, Ambassador and DCM raised with Interior Minister Sherpao our concern that the GOP's decision to close the Jalozai refugee camp by August 31 would create a political and humanitarian crisis. Sherpao confirmed receiving similar demarches from Afghanistan and UNCHR.  He said that the GOP would stop repatriation for Ramadan and likely would wait until March 2008 to resume repatriations.  End Summary.  2. (U) The Jalozai refugee camp is located 35 km southwest of Peshawar and is one of the largest refugee camps in Pakistan. The camp has 109,000 residents and resembles a large rural village, with free-standing homes and many shops. Pursuant to an agreement between the GOA, the GOP, and the UNHCR the Jalozai refugee camp was scheduled for closure by 31 August 2007. The camp residents were informed of the impending closure in February 2007; however, the GOP did not take any steps to close the camp until a few days ago.  3. (C) In anticipation of the 31 August deadline, the GOP surrounded the camp with 700 Frontier Constabulary forces. The security forces have not entered the camp but have asked all shop owners and residents to evacuate the building in preparation for demolition. They have destroyed some lumber shops and other non-essential buildings. There is panic in the camp as most residents have made no preparations for either moving or for the impending demolition. To date, only around 10,000 individuals have been repatriated by the UNHCR. The UNHCR and the GOP estimate that only a few thousand more refugees can be repatriated before the start of Ramadan (early September).  4. (SBU) The UNHCR is anticipating a humanitarian crisis if all the refugees are forced to repatriate within the allotted time. None of the parties involved has the capacity to process all of the refugees and safely resettle them in Afghanistan within 10 days. With the onset of Ramadan and winter in Afghanistan, the refugees will not be able to resettle properly. These displaced people will either remain in Pakistan illegally or live in make-shift housing on the other side of the border. In the worst case scenario, if the GOP continues to pressure the refugees, the UNHCR will have to abandon the camp for security reasons.  5. (C) The UNHCR has been urging the GOP at various levels and also seeking the GOA's leverage in asking the GOP to reach an agreement with the tribal leaders in the Jalozai camp to evacuate in March 2008, as soon as repatriation season reopens. The GOP's current pressure has made it clear to the tribal leaders that the camp has to be closed.  6. (C) DCM delivered a demarche to Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao on 25 August urging him to stop the evacuation until March 2008. The Ambassador followed up with Sherpao on 30 August. Minister Sherpao told the Ambassador that 3,000-4,000 more refugees were expected to leave before the beginning of Ramadan (o/a September 12) and that repatriation would be suspended for Ramadan. Sherpao was considering UNHCR's request to delay the closure; he had received a similar request from GOA officials who reported that Afghanistan was not prepared to receive all the Jalozai refugees. Sherpao said that the GOP will probably delay further repatriation until the recommended March 2008 date and then make sure that the Jalozai refugees are the first to be repatriated.  7. (C) Comment: Averting this forced and sudden repatriation is a positive sign of improved bilateral relations.  However, Pakistan remains eager to close the three remaining Afghan refugee camps as soon as possible. End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07PESHAWAR575", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/5/2007 14:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003857  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2017 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SUICIDE ATTACKS SHAKE RAWALPINDI  REF: PESHAWAR 575  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On September 4, 31 people were killed and 67 injured in two separate suicide bomb attacks on government targets in Islamabad's neighboring city of Rawalpindi. In the short-term these attacks and the kidnapping (reftel) of Frontier Corps soldiers in Waziristan will undermine public confidence in the government/military.  It is too soon to predict whether these attacks will build public support for actions against militants in the long term.  Security and checkpoints have been increased throughout Rawalpindi and Islamabad. All mission staff are safe and accounted for. End Summary.  2. (U) In the early morning hours of September 4, two successive bombs went off in the downtown area of Rawalpindi. The first bomb went off near Qasim Market at 7:17 am, targeting a bus carrying Defense Ministry staff. The second blast occurred minutes later in RA Bazaar. Security personnel immediately cordoned off the areas and rescue workers and army personnel moved in to help the injured and wounded. The attacks left 31 people dead and 67 people injured.  3. (C) Authorities confirm that the large blasts were suicide attacks, though there is some disagreement whether both or one of the blasts were suicide bombings. Government officials have put Rawalpindi and neighboring Islamabad on high alert, with increased security checkpoints and hospitals on standby. The district government of Rawalpindi has condemned the attacks and announced a full investigation into the incident. Officials are claiming that the bombers had direct contacts with tribal militants, which is supported by their targeting of government officials.  4. (C) Comment: Suicide attacks in Rawalpindi have brought what is often described as tribal violence directly to the heart of Pakistan's military establishment. After the initial spate of post-Red Mosque attacks, August had been relatively quiet in Islamabad and Rawalpindi. Yesterday's bombings are a stark reminder that the daily insecurity and violence that plague the tribal areas, make Pakistan's settled areas increasingly vulnerable as well. End Comment.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07LAHORE524", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/6/2007 17:00", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003873  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: THE NAWAZ FACTOR CONTINUED: RETURN SCENARIOS  REF: (A) LAHORE 524 (B) ISLAMBAD 3819 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  There are four scenarios regarding former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's return to Pakistan, which now seems likely September 10.  (1)  He could postpone his arrival because of Saudi persuasion or cold feet about his prospects.  This seems the least likely option.  (2)  The government could allow him to enter Pakistan and move about the country freely.  (3) The government could arrest him. (4) The government could deport him.  All except the first have obvious uncertainties for the Pakistani government, for Musharraf personally, and for our policy in Pakistan.  This cable attempts to lay out the scenarios.  We do not know if the Chief Justice has become less hostile to Musharraf, which would affect our assessment.  The downsides could be lessened if the government is able to reach a long-awaited deal with Benazir Bhutto.  We will update the Department after meetings tomorrow.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Our contacts in Nawaz's party, the Pakistan Muslim League-N (PML-N), confirm that the party is organizing a massive road caravan to escort Nawaz and his brother Shahbaz from the airport in Rawalpindi (where they intend to land on a commercial carrier) to their power base in Lahore.  PML-N stalwarts hope to replicate the Chief Justice's triumphant cavalcades this summer and turn this four-hour trip into a prolonged celebration to challenge Musharraf's rule.  3.  (C)  The government is taking several precautionary measures against Nawaz's return.  In the past few days the police have arrested approximately 200 PML-N organizers and plan to arrest several hundred more over the next few days. All those arrested are being held under the Maintenance of Public Order law, which gives the provincial government broad powers of preventive detention for up to thirty days.  While this is legal and the leadership of the PML-N privately and cynically accepts it as the normal cost of politics here, it is not a step that enhances the reputation of the Pakistani government.  4.  The press also reports that the government is pre-positioning a brigade to deal with expected crowds/demonstrations.  The Accountability Court is poised to re-open three corruption cases against Nawaz; today, the government re-filed murder charges against his brother Shahbaz.  Musharraf and his emissaries also reportedly continue to try and convince the Saudis to pressure Nawaz to remain outside of Pakistan.  Delay -----  5.  (C)  There are still those, like Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, who believe that Nawaz will not risk arrest or deportation and will find an excuse to stay away, at least until after the presidential election.  Some in Nawaz's party are urging him not to come because he is more useful making statements in London than in jail or in Saudi Arabia.  This post does not know if the Saudis have been persuasive.  Nawaz may still get cold feet, but we believe he would lose credibility at this point if he did not return.  But a stop for umrah in Saudi Arabia could still give him a fig leaf to avoid confrontation.  Unimpeded Return ----------------  6.  (C)  Some Musharraf advisors are urging that Nawaz be allowed to return unimpeded.  They argue that PML-N's party structure has been deteriorating (Ref A).  Even with a surge in media attention and whatever popularity he has gained from sticking to his anti-Musharraf platform, the PML-N is having trouble fielding electoral candidates.  Legally, Nawaz's conviction makes him ineligible to run for elected office, so he would be restricted to political maneuvering.  7.  (C)  This would be the most difficult option for Musharraf to swallow.  It would permit the man whom he believed tried to kill him return despite reneging on an  ISLAMABAD 00003873  002 OF 002   agreement not to return or engage in political activity for ten years.  Although we believe Musharraf's fears are exaggerated, many in Musharraf's party fear defections to PML-N and the impact of the charismatic Sharif brothers on popular opinion and on Musharraf's electoral prospects. Nawaz's  presence could energize PML-N supporters and have a considerable impact in urban areas of the Punjab where the Sharifs have their largest following.  As post has reported, the evaluation by Pakistanis of whether Nawaz can siphon votes from Musharraf's ruling party also depends on who wins and who loses in the Benazir deal.  Arrest ------  8.  (C)  Nawaz has been convicted on hijacking and corruption charges; there are additional pending cases against him and his brother.  Fearing a less than sympathetic court, the government has not requested re-affirmation of these charges, but it certainly could arrest either or both Sharifs upon their return.  In the short-term, his arrest would again generate demonstrations and lead to violence if they are mishandled by the government.  If the government acted within the law to pursue Nawaz, however, it could lessen sympathy for Nawaz.  9.  (C)  Musharraf's supporters fear that arrest might turn Nawaz into \"another Mandela.\"  However, PML-N is equally concerned that arresting Nawaz would reduce his utility even more than deporting him.  At least abroad, he would be able to continue to make political pronoucements and engage the Pakistani press.  Deportation -----------  10.  (C)  The media and virtually all of our sources indicate that the government is planning to deport the Sharifs on arrival.  This will put the government in contempt of the Supreme Court, which will respond, but we do not know how. Yesterday, the Chief Justice gave hints that he did not want to encourage general instability in the country.  Deportation certainly will generate short-term protests in Rawalpindi, Lahore, Islamabad and Faisalabad.  These demonstrations would be a combination of pro-Nawaz protesters and those opposed to Musharraf flaunting the Chief Justice.  Lawyers' associations and civil society will join in the demonstrations.  11.  (C)  The degree of street violence would depend on how well the government controls its police/security forces and avoids clashes under the eyes of the media.  Our judgment is that demonstrations would be messy but are unlikely to result in a loss of life as they did in Karachi in May.  An important question for us is Nawaz's ability to mobilize supporters in the street if he were not personally on the scene.  While there are similarities with the Chief Justice issue, the Chief Justice was personally leading demonstrations and had made himself into a symbol of much that is unpopular in Pakistan. Nawaz also had a reputation for corruption when he was Prime Minister.  Demonstrations that undermine public support for the government, however, could speed defections from Musharraf's party to PML-N or PPP candidates in the general election.  12 (C)  Comment: We believe that a public announcement of a Musharraf-Bhutto deal would go a long way toward lessening the downsides of Nawaz's return and deflate whatever political influence he might have. We will keep Washington advised as the situation develops.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3779|07ISLAMABAD3818|07ISLAMABAD3889", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/7/2007 15:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003889  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S SUPREME COURT KEEPS THE PRESSURE ON MUSHARRAF  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3818      B. ISLAMABAD 3779  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: President Musharraf's legal counsel told the Pakistan Supreme Court September 6 that Musharraf's term as President would end on November 15, but he will remain in office until a successor is chosen.  The Chief Justice rejected efforts to immediately restrain Musharraf from seeking re-election or participating in electoral activities.  The Court also rejected the government's efforts to delay consideration of a petition to declare Musharraf ineligible to concurrently hold two offices.  On the latter case, the court appointed a three-member plus Attorney General \"friends of the court\" advisory committee.  The committee includes the Aitzaz Ahsan, the lawyer who successfully defended the Chief Justice and organized his country-wide rallies; a member of the Pakistan People's Party, he has been a vociferous critic of Musharraf and the proposed Musharraf-Bhutto alliance. Hearings on the first case will resume September 19 and on the second case September 17.  The Chief Justice's moves ensure that he keeps the pressure on Musharraf and the Court on the front pages.  End Summary.  -------------------------------------- Court Tells Pakistan Lawyers' Forum to Allow Democratic Process to Work --------------------------------------  2. (U) On September 5, a seven-member bench of the Supreme Court headed by Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry rejected the request of the Pakistan Lawyers' Forum to immediately restrain Musharraf from seeking re-election and participating in polticial activities.  In his remarks, Chief Justice Chaudhry rejected the petition's stay request and noted the importance of the upcoming general elections. \"We are progressing toward a system and elections are at hand. Do you want to derail this system? If we give you a stay, what would happen to the whole system? We have to run the system,\" Chaudhry reportedly said.  However, the court contined the case and scheduled the next hearing for September 19.  --------------------------------------------- Government Counsel Tells Court Musharraf Will Continue In Office Until Successor Appointed ---------------------------------------------  3. (U) On September 6, Chief Justice Chaudhry headed another seven-member bench to hear the a petition contesting Musharraf's holding of dual offices.  In response to a tasking, Musharraf's lead counsel, Sharifuddin Pirzada, told the Court that Musharraf's term exires November 15 and that Musharraf would continue in office until a successor is appointed. When asked to submit a statement on the President's holding of two offices, Sharifuddin asked that the Court first decide on the Lawyers' Forum Case.  The Court essentially denied Sharifuddin's request when they scheduled the next hearing for September 17, two days before the next hearing of the Lawyers' Forum petition.  ------------------------------------------ Court Appoints Amici Curie From Both Sides ------------------------------------------  4. (U) The Court also nominated three attorneys as amici curie (friends of the court) to advise them: Senator Syed Mohammed Zafar (a member of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party), Abdul Hafeez Pirzada (former Law Minister during Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto's tenure and one of the architects of the 1973 constitution), and Aitzaz Ahsan.  Ahsan is a Pakistan People's Party leader and vociferous critic of Musharraf and the proposed Musharraf-Bhutto alliance.  Ahsan successfully defended the Chief Justice in his recent suspension case and organized his country-wide rallies.  The court also instructed the Attorney General to be part of the advisory board.  ------- Comment -------   ISLAMABAD 00003889  002 OF 002   5. (C)  In this week's action, the Chief Justice officially played a balanced hand in considering the first group of cases pending against Musharraf.  At the same time, he adeptly maintained his role as a key figure in determining Musharraf's political future and ensured that court action would remain front-page news.  The inclusion of Ahsan in the \"friends of the court\" advisory committee guarantees continuing robust judicial challenges to the President. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3692|07ISLAMABAD3706|07ISLAMABAD3873|07LAHORE524", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/8/2007 13:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 003901  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PREPARING FOR NAWAZ SHARIF'S RETURN TO PAKISTAN  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3873      B. ISLAMABAD 3706      C. ISLAMABAD 3692      D. LAHORE 524  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: President Musharraf's government is planning to deport Nawaz Sharif upon his expected arrival September 10, although some of his advisors continue to try to dissaude him of this.  Saudi emissary Saad Hariri will be here today (September 8) to talk to Musharraf and reportedly make a public appeal on behalf of Saudi leaders to persuade Nawaz to stay away.  If the GOP deports Nawaz, it will be in contempt of the Supreme Court's August 23 decision allowing Nawaz to return, but the consequences of a contempt citation are not yet clear. A Lahore terrorism court has issued an arrest warrant for Nawaz's brother Shahbaz on murder charges, accountability courts have set a September 13 hearing date for corruption charges against Nawaz, and the security forces continue to round up Nawaz supporters. The government has also put in place elaborate contingency plans to avoid unrest and control crowds but, as we have reported earlier, demonstrations are likely.  While Nawaz is publicly committed to return and is invariably described as \"stubborn,\" the government is also hoping to discourage his return by putting out a consistent message.  They hope Nawaz may ultimately calculate that exile in Saudi Arabia would be worse politically than remaining in London.  2. (C) Summary contd. The government continues to reach out to the Chaudhry power-brokers in the ruling Pakistan Muslim League to convince them to soften their opposition to a deal with Bhutto.  Senior government officials tell us that the ruling Pakistan Muslim League will be more tractable to a deal with Bhutto once Nawaz is \"no longer in the picture.\" End Summary.  NAWAZ SHARIF'S RETURN PLANS ---------------------------  3. (U) Although it is unclear exactly where he will land, Nawaz Sharif reportedly plans to arrive on September 10 in Islamabad Airport (Rawalpindi) with a planeload of media. His supporters are planning to assemble crowds to welcome the former Prime Minister home. Nawaz's party is mobilizing its forces across Punjab, the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) and parts of Sindh to bring supporters to the Islamabad airport and to line the streets on his expected journey to Lahore. The heartland of Nawaz support is urban Punjab, where party workers are anticipating huge welcome crowds in every city. Party leaders claim that the turnout will be in the hundreds of thousands, though tens of thousands strikes us as a more accurate estimate.   MUSHARRAF'S GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO NAWAZ -----------------------------------------  4. (C) Sources close to President Musharraf have made it clear they are planning to deport Nawaz Sharif if he returns on September 10. Musharraf has rejected arresting Nawaz because he fears the Supreme Court will release him, and in jail Nawaz would become a rallying point for the opposition. Some of Musharraf's advisers continue to try to dissuade him from deporting Nawaz because of the potential for protests and Supreme Court retaliation.  5. (C) On September 8, Saad Hariri arrived in Islamabad to meet with President Musharraf. Hariri is reportedly planning to make a public appeal on behalf of the Saudi government to persuade the Sharif brothers to stay away from Pakistan.  6. (C) Police in Punjab province have jailed over 1,000 party activists but have left alone the senior leadership of Nawaz's party. Papers report the harassment and arrests of hundreds of Nawaz party activists all over Punjab. Nawaz party leadership is claiming raids on many of its offices and  ISLAMABAD 00003901  002 OF 003   police intimidation to prevent large crowds from welcoming him. The roundup of party activists -- using the legal authority of the Maintenance of Public Order Act -- is a common (if regrettable) political tactic in Pakistan, and most activists are released after a few days.  7. (U) Security authorities in Rawalpindi have imposed restrictions, including prohibitions on the assembly of five or more persons in public places, to control the law and order situation. Rawalpindi has been placed on high alert for September 10, with an overall increase in checkpoints and security blocks. Police plan to block all routes that lead to Rawalpindi and Islamabad from the NWFP and Punjab. Government sources tell us that the security plans are very elaborate and more thorough than those for the Chief Justice rallies. The government estimates that protests will last no longer than a few days, but the chances for miscalculation by the parties and the government are considerable.  8. (U) A special anti-terrorism court in Lahore September 7 ordered police to arrest Shahbaz Sharif (Nawaz's brother) on his return to Pakistan. Arrest warrants were issued for an outstanding case accusing Shahbaz of ordering five extra-judicial killings when he was chief minister of Punjab.  9. (U) On September 7, the National Accountability Bureau court set September 13 as the hearing date for three pending corruption cases against Nawaz Sharif and his family. The accountability court refused to issue arrest warrants until Nawaz Sharif actually arrives in Pakistan.   NAWAZ'S STATUS AND THE BENAZIR-MUSHARRAF DEAL ---------------------------------------------  10. (C) Former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's meeting with National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz dominated the news and had political pundits arguing over the status of the proposed Musharraf-Bhutto alliance. Aziz and Bhutto met on September 4 in Dubai to try to overcome the last sticking points blocking the deal. On September 7, newspapers carried stories of a potential breakdown of deal talks. Most political commentators remain silent on the prospects of the deal, waiting to see the post-Nawaz arrival landscape.  11. (C) High level ruling Pakistan Muslim League officials including Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain are worried about the deal and fear potential defections to Nawaz's party.  Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz and Pakistan Muslim League leaders continue to meet with their party members to boost morale and reassure them of a strong party infrastructure. Opinion concerning the potential for defections to Nawaz's party is divided; however, the deportation of Nawaz Sharif, if it is politically successful, may effectively stop any defections from the ruling party.  12. (U) On September 7, the Supreme Court rejected a petition by Benazir Bhutto challenging the court's ability to seek documents from Swiss authorities regarding money laundering cases against Bhutto. The Supreme Court has remanded the pending corruption cases against Bhutto to the Sindh High Court for a decision on the merits. According to the Supreme Court, the Sindh High Court can seek any documents it needs to decide the case.  13. (C) Comment: We believe that Musharraf's decision to proceed with the deportation is virtually final.  We recognize that sticking to this position also has the virtue of potentially dissuading Nawaz from returning, since the prospect of years in Saudi Arabia is unlikely to be a politically appealing one.  Still, our sources invariably describe Nawaz as a \"stubborn man\" and do not believe he can be persuaded to stay in London.  14. (C) Deporting Nawaz will put the government in contempt of the August 23 Supreme Court decision to allow him to return, but we do not yet know the consequences of a contempt citation.  While the government is taking prudent measures to  ISLAMABAD 00003901  003 OF 003   control demonstrations, the possibility of violence is always present in Pakistan.  If the government manages to deport Nawaz without paying a heavy political price -- and this is a huge unknown -- it will calm the fears of Musharraf and his party and improve prospects for a proposed alliance with Bhutto.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3692|07ISLAMABAD3706|07ISLAMABAD3873|07ISLAMABAD3901|07LAHORE524", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/10/2007 11:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003923  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/10/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: NAWAZ DEPORTED ON RETURN TO ISLAMABAD  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3901      B. ISLAMABAD 3873      C. ISLAMABAD 3706      D. ISLAMABAD 3692      E. LAHORE 524  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was deported from Islamabad to Saudi Arabia within hours of his return to Pakistan on September 10.  Security forces kept the capital under tight security.  Senior opposition leaders were placed under house arrest, and only small-scale demonstrations have occurred.  So far, Nawaz's party has filed a contempt of court petition before the Supreme Court; however, there was no court hearing before his departure.  At mid-day on September 10, the country remains calm.  The unknown is what the Supreme Court will do now.  End Summary.  ------------------------------------- Nawaz Returns to Pakistan, But Deported Within Hours to Saudi Arabia -------------------------------------  2. (U) Former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was deported -- reportedly to Saudi Arabia -- about five hours after his return to Pakistan on September 10.  3. (U) Sharif's plane landed at approximately 0840 in Islamabad to an airport in lockdown status.  He was met by security personnel and remained on the plane after other passengers had disembarked.  Approximately two hours after the plane landed, Nawaz exited the plane for the airport's VIP lounge, where he reportedly met with Pakistani and Saudi officials for \"negotiations\" and was later placed on a plane bound for Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.  -------------------------------------------- Security Forces Raid PML-N Office, Block Off Airport, Arrest Senior Political Leaders --------------------------------------------  4. (U) There were reports that over 1,000 political activists in Rawalpindi and Islamabad were arrested in recent days. Late in the evening on September 9, police reportedly raided the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) office in Islamabad, arresting party workers and disconnecting telephones.  By the morning of September 10, Pakistan's security forces had effectively shut off access to Islamabad Airport.  Roads leading to the airport were blocked, cell phones around the airport were jammed, and no Nawaz supporters reached the airport.  The government also shut down the Grand Trunk road linking Islamabad to Nawaz's power base in Lahore.  5. (C) Numerous prominent opposition leaders were placed under house arrest early September 10, including PML-N Chairman Raja Zafar ul-Haq, Jamaat Islami (JI) leader Qazi Hussain Ahmed, and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazl (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman.  JI leader Liaqat Baloch was also taken into police custody for 30 days.  Nawaz's party has been working with an alliance of these religious parties.  Police reacted quickly and dispersed pro-Nawaz crowds that assembled near the airport, in Islamabad, in Gujrat, and at a bridge on the border between Punjab and the Northwest Frontier Province. Several opposition leaders were able to talk to reporters from their detention sites with the press while Nawaz was at the airport.  --------------------------------------------- --------- Saudis Make Last-Minute Appeal to Nawaz Not to Return, Nawaz Rejects It, Also Rejected Musharraf's Emissaries --------------------------------------------- ---------  6. (U) During a September 8 joint press conference with President Musharraf in Islamabad, Saudi intelligence chief Prince Muqrin bin Abdul Aziz and Saad Hariri, son of the assassinated Lebanese PM, appealed to Nawaz \"for the sake of stability in Pakistan\" to abide by the agreement he had signed in 2000 with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to remain outside of Pakistan for 10 years.  Aziz said that the deal had been brokered and guaranteed by the Saudi royal family to help Sharif get out of jail. (Note: Nawaz was convicted for  ISLAMABAD 00003923  002 OF 002   hijacking and corruption and sentenced to life imprisonment plus fourteen years.  End Note.)  Acknowledging the recent Supreme Court ruling that Sharif should be permitted to return to Pakistan, Aziz said, \"Which comes first, the agreement or the Supreme Court ruling?  We fully respect the Supreme Court...but you still have an agreement.\"  7. (U) Later on September 8 at a press conference in London, Nawaz publicly rejected the Saudi appeal and reiterated his determination to return to Pakistan.  While he confirmed that he had signed an agreement with the Saudi government in 2000, he asserted that he made a verbal agreement with the Saudi royal family that the exile would be for five years only.  8. (U) On September 9, Nawaz confirmed for the first time that Musharraf had sent emissaries to him in London with an eye towards entering into a dialogue, but that he had rejected the offer because he would \"not deviate from his principles.\"  9. (C) Comment: The deportation came as no surprise (reftels), although the three-hour \"negotiation\" at the airport produced a Keystone Cops atmosphere that no doubt will produce multiple conspiracy theories in tomorrow's press.  Effective police presence and the large number of pre-emptive arrests has limited the number and scope of demonstrations so far, but our consulate in Lahore also reports that Nawaz's last-minute change of flight routes -- switching from Gulf Air to PIA -- and his sudden decision to leave his younger brother, Shahbaz, in London hampered local party efforts to organize welcome events.  The change in flight plans also confused the press, many of whom were, much to their irritation, forced to fly on the Gulf Air flight without Nawaz.  Rumors began to circulate around Lahore last night that Nawaz had cut a deal with the Saudis and with the government, which also prompted some party activists to stay home.  10. (C) Comment, cont: The Court did not take an opportunity to block Nawaz's departure, but it may issue contempt of court charges against government officials.  This may well provoke demonstrations if the government defies the order to \"produce\" Nawaz.  For now, however, Musharraf likely is breathing a sigh of relief.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3692|07ISLAMABAD3706|07ISLAMABAD3873|07ISLAMABAD3901|07ISLAMABAD3923|07LAHORE524", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/12/2007 9:39", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 003952  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/11/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: NAWAZ: THE DAY AFTER THE DEPORTATION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3923      B. ISLAMABAD 3901      C. ISLAMABAD 3873      D. ISLAMABAD 3706      E. ISLAMABAD 3692      F. LAHORE 524  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Twenty-four hours after former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's deportation from Pakistan to Saudi Arabia, Pakistan remains calm.  While opposition parties called for nationwide demonstrations, turnout was weak, and many senior opposition leaders remained under house arrest.  The government's official position appears to be that Nawaz left for Saudi Arabia voluntarily.  Nawaz's party filed two more petitions on September 11 contesting his deportation, but the Supreme Court did not hold any hearings due to a nationwide lawyers' strike.  Political commentary so far has been mixed; the media reported that the U.S. and EU criticized the deportation as being contrary to the Court order.  The success of Musharraf's gamble in deporting Nawaz may still depend on the Supreme Court. End Summary.  --------------------- Streets Remain Quiet, Stocks Go Up ---------------------  2. (U) The All Parties Democratic Movement (a Nawaz-led loose coalition of religious and secular opposition political parties) announced that they would stage nationwide demonstrations to protest the government's arrests and Nawaz's deportation. Protests were scheduled in Islamabad and Lahore for mid-afternoon; however, no protests occurred in Islamabad and turnout was weak (approximately 300) in Lahore.  3. (U) Prominent opposition party leaders remained under house arrest; however, Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam - Fazl (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman left for Saudi Arabia late on September 10 (for umrah, according to his staff).  4. (U) Investors appeared to breath a sigh of relief that the ordeal was -- at least for the moment -- over.  After Nawaz's departure, the Karachi Stock Exchange shot up by 139.3 points.  --------------------------------------------- -- Lawyers' Strike Prevents Supreme Court Hearings --------------------------------------------- --  5. (U) The Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) filed two new petitions with the Supreme Court on September 11 protesting Nawaz's deportation.  The first petition seeks to hold the government in contempt of the Supreme Court's previous ruling that Nawaz should be able to return to Pakistan.  The second petition seeks to force the government to return Nawaz to Pakistan.  There were no Supreme Court hearings on September 11, however, due to a lawyers' strike. (Note: While lawyers did object to Nawaz's deportation, yesterday's fatal shooting of attorney Raja Riaz in Karachi was the primary motive behind the nationwide strike called by four of Pakistan's bar associations. End Note.)  The Supreme Court plans to resume hearings-- including for the PML-N petitions -- on Wednesday, September 12.  ----------------------------------- Law Minister Denies Nawaz Deported -----------------------------------  6. (U) Pakistan's new Law Minister, Zahid Hamid, denied that the government had deported Nawaz and claimed that he went to Saudi Arabia on his own will.  PML-N Additional Secretary General Jaffar Iqbal cried foul, however, and said that the government was lying. \"Nawaz asked to remain in Pakistan, even if he was placed under arrest.  He was deported against his wishes,\" Iqbal said.  7. (U) For his part, Nawaz has been incommunicado since his arrival in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. He was reportedly met in Jeddah by Saudi authorities and whisked away to \"Sharif Palace\" - a mansion his family owns.   ISLAMABAD 00003952  002 OF 002   -------------------------- Political Commentary Mixed --------------------------  8. (U) Political pundits expressed mixed opinions about the deportation.  Pakistan People's Party spokesman Farhatullah Babar failed to support Nawaz, citing Nawaz's 2000 agreement with the Saudi government.  The matter is between Nawaz, the Saudis, and the courts, Babar said.  National Reconstruction Board Chairman Daniyal Aziz defended the government's action, criticizing those who lionize the Supreme Court's recent ruling to the exclusion of previous court actions.  Aziz pointed out that Nawaz had been convicted of a crime in 2000, and that he was therefore ineligible to hold political office anyway. Media interpreted U.S. and EU statements as criticism of the deportation because it violated the Supreme Court's order to allow Nawaz to return.  9. (C) Comment:  Once again, Musharraf is benefiting from the opposition's inability to unite against the government.  But the success of Musharraf's gamble may still depend on Supreme Court action.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE125581", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/12/2007 12:18", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 003957  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, ASEC, OTRA, PK SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR CODEL BOEHNER  REF: STATE 125581  1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit of Rep. John Boehner, Rep. Peter Hoekstra, Rep. Pat Tiberi, Rep. Tom Latham, Rep. Devin Nunes, Rep. Charles Wilson, Rep. Peter King, Ms. Jen Stewart, Mr. Brian Kennedy, COL Paul Kennedy, and GySgt Ramses Cypress, from September 14 to September 15, 2007.  2.  Control officer for the visit will be POL Officer Tamanna Salikuddin. She can be reached at the following numbers: Embassy 92-51-208-2000; Office: 92-51-208-2921; fax: 92-51-208-2559; cell 92-0302-854-6742; email SalikuddinTS@state.gov.  3. Visitors must/must obtain separate post clearance if they plan to visit any of the three Mission Pakistan consulates (Karachi, Peshawar, Lahore) or any other areas under the jurisdiction of the consulates. Most travel outside of Islamabad will require separate post clearance. Post clearance for the consulates should be requested via cable to the consulate(s) on the planned itinerary.  4. Visas: Everyone arriving in Pakistan must/must have a valid visa. If you do not have a valid visa, you will be denied entry.  If you will be in Pakistan on TDY for more than 30 days, ensure that you have a multiple entry visa that shows \"Work at the U.S. Embassy\" or \"Official Business\" as the purpose of your visit.  If your visa does not contain this language, your visa cannot be extended or renewed while in Pakistan and you will have to physically leave the country to renew or extend it.  5.  Electronic Equipment:  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State personnel, must coordinate the transport of any USG provided electronic or photographic equipment (to include laptops/electronic notebooks), and receive RSO authorization prior to introducing the equipment into the Chancery.  No connectivity is allowed to State's unclassified or classified networks.  Personal electronic or photographic equipment as well as camera/video capable cell phones are not permitted in the Chancery.  6.  Security:  Islamabad and the three constituent consulates in Karachi, Lahore, and Peshawar are critical-threat posts. Employees assigned to Pakistan are unaccompanied and receive danger pay.  The Department of State Travel Warning for Pakistan asks U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan because of the continued high security concerns about terrorism in Pakistan.  The Embassy approves only essential official travel to Pakistan.  All official visitors to Islamabad must adhere to Embassy security standards and procedures, and those staying more than one week must attend a security briefing held every Tuesday at 10 a.m.  TDY travel outside of Islamabad requires RSO clearance. Travelers to the consulates must follow RSO consulate security procedures.  The potential for continued threats to Americans in Pakistan from Al-Qaida and other extremist elements remains real.  A suicide bomber killed two Consulate employees at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in March 2006. A grenade attack against the Protestant International Church in Islamabad killed two Embassy members and injured several others in March 2002.  American, Western, and Christian targets continue to be threatened and attacked.  Anti-Americanism remains strong among certain elements of the population.  For further information about travel to Pakistan, U.S. citizens should consult the Department of State's Consular Information Sheet for Pakistan, available via the internet at http://travel.state.gov.  7.  Hotel Security:  Security at major hotels in Pakistan has been generally good.  However, extremist elements know that westerners stay in and congregate at these hotels as evinced by the May 2002 car bomb attack outside the Sheraton hotel in  ISLAMABAD 00003957  002 OF 005   Karachi that killed nearly a dozen French engineers.  As well, an October 2004 bombing in the lobby of the Islamabad Marriott injured a number of people, several seriously. In January 2007, a suicide bomber detonated outside the Islamabad Marriott Hotel employee entrance killing one and wounding five others. The threat remains active.  A. Post uses the Serena and Marriott Hotels for TDY visitors. Based on our continuing review of the security programs at both hotel, they may continue to be used to house short-term (seven days or less) TDY visitors. All agencies and sections that sponsor long-term TDY personnel (eight days or longer) should consider, where possible, the use of guest houses, residences currently occupied by PCS or TDY employees of their agency or section, or houses rented expressly for the use of long-term TDY personnel.  B. The guidelines below must be followed by all short-term TDY personnel (seven days or less): --TDY personnel should minimize the time they spend in the hotel lobby and adjoining areas. --TDY personnel should establish a transportation schedule and adhere to it. They should not congregate in the lobby area waiting for transportation, but should arrive in the lobby for pick-up approximately one minute before schedule departure. --The Marriott Hotel has a private dining room for Embassy visitor use. Buffet breakfast service will be available there. TDY personnel are also encouraged to take lunch or diner there, ordered directly from one of the restaurants located in the hotel. There is no extra charge for this service. Room service is also available at no extra charge. --TDY personnel should report any security concerns directly and immediately to the Regional Security Office.  C.  The Serena and Marriott have been instructed top house Embassy personnel in the back, away from the main roads that run adjacent to the front/main entrances of the hotels. Also, since fire fighting is not up to U.S. standards, post recommends that TDY personnel stay on lower floors in the hotels and familiarizes themselves with the emergency exits on their floors immediately after check-in. Valuables such as money or jewelry should also not be left behind or hidden in the room.  8.  Public Transportation: for safety reasons, Americans are prohibited from using taxis and all public transportation. The Embassy requires that official visitors use its motor pool. Emergency telephone numbers:  American Embassy Islamabad        92-51-208-0000 Marine Security Guard (24 hrs)    92-51-208-2338 Regional Security Office          92-51-208-2203/2204 American Consulate Karachi        92-021-520-4200 American Consulate Lahore         92-042-603-4000 American Consulate Peshawar       92-091-526-8800  9.  Embassy Motor Pool Services:  Post maintains a 24-hour motor pool.  However, the demands on the motor pool have increased considerably since September 2001 and motor pool services may not be immediately available when you need them.  Accordingly, Post strongly urges all TDYers either to provide a fund cite in their travel orders or come with sufficient resources in hand for the purpose of renting a vehicle and driver (if necessary).  The Procurement Section at Post can assist TDYers with vehicle rentals. Motor Pool cars and drivers are available for airport pick up and drop-offs.  An International Driver's License is not valid in Pakistan.  10. Health:  The Embassy Health Unit has provided the following information to aid visitors and temporary duty employees in Pakistan:  A. Facilities:  There are health units at the embassy and each of the three consulates.  The Islamabad Health unit is staffed by a Regional Medical Officer, a Foreign Service Nurse Practitioner and two RNs.  It provides routine medical care and basic laboratory services during the workweek.  It does not supply medications for chronic medical conditions; these must be  ISLAMABAD 00003957  003 OF 005   brought with you.  The facilities in Lahore, Karachi and Peshawar are extremely limited in the services they provide and are staffed by part-time local medical providers. Official visitors traveling to or working at those locations should bring all personal medicines with them including over-the-counter drugs.  B. Access: Access to the Health Units at all Mission Pakistan posts other than 'good samaritan' care is limited to American citizen employees and contractors who are eligible for Health Unit services.  Good samaritan care is emergency care designed to stabilize a patient until s/he can reach or be reached by local medical practitioners.  The following American citizen employees and contractors are ineligible/ineligible for Health Unit services:  NON-PERSONAL SERVICES (COMMERCIAL) CONTRACTORS  DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES PERMANENTLY ASSIGNED TO PAKISTAN without a current medical clearance from the Department of State's Office of Medical Services (MED).  TDY DIRECT HIRE EMPLOYEES ABROAD FOR MORE THAN 60 DAYS IN A CALENDAR YEAR without a current MED clearance.  PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTORS (PSCs) unless all of the following conditions have been met:  --  The PSC has a current MED clearance.  --  The PSC's contract stipulates that s/he is eligible for MED services and requires the individual to have health insurance coverage overseas.  --  The employing agency is paying for medical services under ICASS and guarantees funding for the direct charge of local hospitalization and medical evacuation.  Agencies should review personal services contracts BEFORE the arrival of PSCs to determine the status of Health Unit access and must inform the Health Unit of eligible PSCs before they arrive. PSCs must submit documentation proving eligibility for services to the Health Unit.  The Health Unit can provide a copy of the Health Unit Handbook to employees and contractors who are ineligible for services. The Handbook contains a list of physicians to whom the Health Unit refers patients and a list of acceptable hospital facilities and pharmacies in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Lahore.  C.  Food and Water-borne Illnesses:  Visitors to Pakistan are at high risk for water-borne and gastrointestinal illnesses. Careful attention to the choice of food and beverages helps to reduce the risks.  Avoid salad bars and buffets while eating at local restaurants; a la carte items are your safest bet.  Meat, eggs, and vegetables should always be thoroughly cooked or steamed. Safe foods include steaming hot dishes, rice, pasta, cooked vegetables served hot, and bread products.  Foods that are moist and served at room temperature, especially peeled fruits, salads, sauces, egg-based foods, mayonnaise-based dishes and buffet offerings  ISLAMABAD 00003957  004 OF 005   are risky.  Avoid ice cream as well.  D.  Drinks:  Safe drinks include hot tea, coffee, and carbonated beverages.  Assume all tap water is contaminated contrary to notices occasionally posted in some hotels or elsewhere.  The only exception to this rule is the tap water on the embassy compound. Commercially available water bottled in Pakistan has been found to be inconsistently safe for consumption.  Bottled water sold in our commissary has been judged safe.  Be sure the seals have not been broken.  Remember that freezing does not make water safe, so avoid ice cubes unless you know they have been made from potable water. Personal portable water purification systems are available commercially at nominal cost and can easily be transported in luggage as they are no larger than a tall mug.  These devices protect against bacteria as well as viruses and protozoa.  E.  Malaria:  Malaria is endemic to various regions in Pakistan, and the risks of infection vary depending on location, altitude and season.  During the rainy season all visitors are advised to take prophylaxis, especially those traveling outside the major metropolitan centers or who make frequent trips between the consulates and Embassy.   Mefloquine is the preferred prophylaxis and should be brought with you during travel as it is unavailable in country except at the mission health units.  Doxycycline is an alternative and is available in country.  In conjunction with medication, visitors must also take measures to reduce contact with mosquitoes, such as wearing clothing that covers most of the body and using an insect repellent containing DEET.  F.  Immunizations:  Visitor immunization records should be reviewed by the Department's Immunization Clinic prior to departure. ealth UNit in IslamHeaFor short-term visitors the following immunizations are recommended: hepatitis a, hepatitis b, typhoid, and tetanus in addition to usual childhood immunizations.  The rabies series is also recommended for Pakistan and should be completed before arriving in country.  The Health Unit in Islamabad can provide most vaccinations except smallpox, which is only available in Washington.  The consulate health units can provide a limited number of vaccinations depending on type needed and health unit staffing.  G.  All TDY travelers are urged to take annual flu vaccination before international travel.  Vaccine will not be available after the current vaccination program is complete in November. Tamiflu, the flu treatment drug, is not available in country.  If travelers wish to obtain supplies for travel, they will need to consult their local provider in the U.S. for a supply prior to travel to Pakistan.   H.  Emergency Medical Services: Emergency medical care is extremely limited in Pakistan even in major cities.  The health units keep  ISLAMABAD 00003957  005 OF 005   up-to-date lists of available facilities in cities in which the embassy and consulates are located.  Travelers should arrange for medical evacuation insurance either personally or through their sponsoring agency prior to their arrival in country.  I.  Automobile and Pedestrian Safety: Overseas automobile accidents remain a major cause of death of expatriates abroad and Pakistan is no exception.  Further, vehicles in Pakistan are driven on the left side of the road, which adds another dimension to automobile and pedestrian safety if you are not used to this traffic pattern. Avoid driving at night if at all possible.  Use seat belts in both rear and front seats, and insist that your driver maintains a safe speed.  Stay alert crossing streets and intersections, especially after dark. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/15/2007 9:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 003994  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PPP ANNOUNCES BENAZIR'S RETURN ON OCTOBER 18   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) At a press conference September 14, Pakistan People's Party (PPP) President Makhdoom Amin Fahim announced that Party Chairman Benazir Bhutto would return to Pakistan on October 18, three days after the window for presidential elections closes.  Fahim announced that on October 18, Bhutto will land in Karachi and immediately visit Mohammed Ali Jinnah's grave. (Note: Jinnah is the founder of Pakistan and is referred to as Qaid-e-Azam -- \"the great leader.\" End Note.)  2. (U) Bhutto has lived in self-imposed exile in London and Dubai since 1999.  She faces corruption charges in Pakistan and abroad from her two previous terms as Prime Minister (1988-90, 1993-96).  Information Secretary Tariq Azim said prior to the press conference that -- unlike the treatment former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif received earlier this week -- Bhutto would not be deported on arrival.  4. (SBU) According to a recent International Republican Institute poll (to be released publicly next week), public support for President Musharraf and his proposed alliance with Bhutto has been dropping.   Some officials in both the Pakistan Muslim League and the People's Party continue to question the political wisdom of this alliance, but the PPP will be celebrating Bhutto's return.  \"Deal or no deal, our leader is coming home\" said one PPP official.  5. (C) Comment: By carefully choosing a return date that will not interfere with Musharraf's re-election plans, Bhutto is leaving the door open to continued negotiations on their alliance.  The decision to announce her return on the first day of Ramadan and Bhutto's plan to immediately visit Qaid-e-Azam's grave are deliberately targeted to appeal to a broader segment of the population than just PPP's moderate, secular base.  With Nawaz Sharif marginalized in exile, Bhutto clearly sees and wants to exploit an opportunity to increase PPP's share of votes in the upcoming parliamentary elections.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3168|07ISLAMABAD3526|07ISLAMABAD3658", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/17/2007 12:09", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004008  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2017 TAGS: PREL, MARR, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: REASSURING PAKISTAN ON THE F-16 SALE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3658      B. ISLAMABAD 3526      C. ISLAMABAD 3168  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C) Summary.  In meetings with the Deputy Secretary last week, President Musharraf, Prime Minister Aziz and Foreign Secretary Khan told us the U.S. had violated the F-16  SIPDIS agreement with Pakistan.  A series of misunderstandings and delays, including important ones on our part, has prompted Pakistan to cease payment, at least until these issues can be resolved.  We know many in Washington are dismayed by what they consider a juvenile reaction on Pakistan's part.  But it is hard to exaggerate the effect the failure of the F-16 sale would have on U.S. relations with Pakistan and on our allies in the Pakistani military.  While many of the issues are technical, they have now crossed into the political realm. Musharraf himself appears to be increasingly concerned about political fallout from unresolved issues with the sale.  The upcoming visit of Air Chief Tanvir will offer a chance to address these topics.  In our view, the outstanding F-16 related issues would more usefully be addressed as a package and not as discrete (and often confusing) technical and legal issues.  We recommend the U.S. Government offer Pakistan assurances that the United States is committed to this sale, while reassuring the Air Chief that a number of the restrictions are not unique to Pakistan.  End summary.  2. (C) During meetings last week with the Deputy Secretary (septels), President Musharraf, Prime Minister Aziz and Foreign Secretary Khan all raised concern about problems relating to the F-16 sale.  Musharraf said that the Air Force believed the U.S. had \"violated\" the agreement intentionally and he urged that we resolve this problem before it undermined bilateral relations.  Musharraf was particularly agitated about the F-16 sale during his September 16 meeting with CODEL Boehner, as he emphasized that the \"man in the street\" (i.e. voter) was aware of the previously failed F-16 sale, and now it looked as if \"history was repeating itself.\"   3. (C) The Prime Minister characterized the U.S. as \"moving the goalposts\" and confirmed what Defense Production Additional Secretary MG Tariq Salim Malik wrote in a September 1 letter to DSCA Director Admiral Wieringa, namely that Pakistan would cease making payments on this case until problems are resolved.  Air Chief Marshal Tanvir Mehmood Ahmed reiterated  his concerns to Office of Defense Representative MG Helmly on September 14.  We understand the next payment was due September 15.  (We also understand that, as a practical matter, there is a grace period of several weeks.)  Need for Reassurance --------------------  4. (C) The decision to pursue this $3 billion deal was difficult for Pakistan.  Air Chief Marshal Tanvir overcame the Finance Minister's concerns about the cost of the planes and the diversion of spending from social programs.  Tanvir's military colleagues warned him the U.S. would repeat the Pressler Amendment sanctions experience of the l990s when the Pakistanis paid for F-16s that were never delivered.  Now, the Air Chief, who is pro-American, is embarrassed and weakened by the perception among his colleagues that the sale -- for whatever reason -- will not be successful.  Much of his aggressive demeanor relates to his weakened standing. Moreover, President Musharraf views this sale as a symbol of a long-term U.S. commitment to Pakistan and a singular benefit of his alliance with us.  5. (C) From our standpoint, the sale was a strategic decision to rebuild relations with a nation critical to the war on terror, despite Congressional and technology transfer concerns.  The notification that the MLU upgrade could not be performed in Pakistan was made just as the press reported the findings of the NIE and the passage of 9/11 Commission recommendations with its Pakistan-related provisions.  Our notification to the Pakistanis of this decision a year after it was resolved in Washington has further clouded the picture.  Much of the Pakistani mistrust is based on incomplete understanding of our security assistance process, and an assumption they are being singled out for specific  ISLAMABAD 00004008  002 OF 003   conditions on the F-16 sale.  We can effectively address these concerns and should do so quickly.  Problems & Recommendations --------------------------  6. (C) In September 2006, Pakistan signed an LOA to  purchase 18 new F-16 fighter aircraft; it also agreed to  purchase 34 MLU kits, with the option of buying an additional 26 to support the used Excess Defense Articles (EDA) USAF planes being  provided to them.  Four EDA F-16s have been delivered; delivery of the new planes is scheduled to begin in January 2010.  Mid-Life Upgrades -----------------  7. (C) In August 2007 (ref C), Ambassador advised the Air Chief Marshal of a letter signed by the Secretary in July 2006 assuring the HIRC (now HFAC) and SFRC Chairmen that the MLUs would  not be performed in Pakistan.  At the time the LOA was signed on September 30, 2006, neither post nor Pakistan was aware of the Secretary's letter.  The LOA does not state that the MLUs can be performed in Pakistan, but Pakistan inferred that the clause relating to U.S. training of Pakistani technicians meant that the MLUs would occur in Pakistan.  8. (C) The Deputy Secretary in his meetings made it clear that the Secretary's decision was final.  But we need to provide the background of our decision and smooth the way for helping Pakistan perform the MLUs in a third country. Pakistan cannot carry out the upgrades elsewhere without our help.  9. (C) Recommendation:  (1) As a follow-up to their meeting, a message from the Deputy Secretary to President Musharraf reassuring him of our commitment to this sale and pledging to work together to resolve outstanding concerns.  This should be delivered  before the September visit to Washington of Air Chief Marshal Tanvir.  (2)  We thank DSCA Director Admiral Wieringa for his offer to meet with Tanvir and recommend he explain our decision and offer specific DCSA assistance in helping the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) evaluate its options and implement its decision on where to perform the MLUs.  Basing ------  10. (C) Reftels explain in detail the problems of the proposed security plan for basing the new F-16s in Pakistan. Simply put, the requirement to base separately the F-16s and foreign-origin SAR and support aircraft is impractical and will undermine the safety and effectiveness of air operations.  11. (C) Recommendation:  Use Air Chief Marshal Tanvir's visit to brief key Congressional interlocutors and build support for Congressional approval of alternative basing proposals that both protect U.S. technology and allow the PAF reasonable air operations.  Encrypted Software ------------------  12. (S) Additional Secretary MG Malik in his letter to DSCA cites as additional evidence of our lack of transparency the fact that the LOA did not contain provisions explaining the need for encrypted devices.  He fears the U.S. will be able to limit the capability of the F-16s by withholding access to the cryptokeys.  13. (S) Recommendation:  We need to explain to the Pakistanis that the provision was in the LOA and many countries are subject to the same restrictions.  The Pakistanis do not fully understand our requirements for sharing encrypted devices and need to be reassured that the aircraft will still fly without the cryptokeys.  A briefing for Air Marshal Tanvir and/or his staff could resolve this misunderstanding.  Link-16 -------  14. (S) When Pakistan signed the LOA, they were aware that  ISLAMABAD 00004008  003 OF 003   the Link-16 command and control technology had not yet been approved for release to Pakistan but assumed it would occur in a timely fashion.  The delay in approval concerns them.  15. (S) Recommendation:  The Joint Chiefs of Staff has approved the release; the decision now rests with the National Security Agency.  We understand that the Defense Intelligence Agency has some concerns about potential technology transfer, and CENTCOM is working to address those concerns.  This issue needs to be resolved quickly.  Digital Radio Frequency Memory (DRFM) -------------------------------------  16. (S) Pakistan was previously cleared for separate elements of DRFM; now they need approval for the whole package.  USAF supports immediate release, but the Defense Technology Security Administration appears to have concerns.  SAF/IA is meeting this week with DTSA to review the issue.  17. (C) Recommendation:  This decision process needs to be accelerated.  18. (C) The National Disclosure Policy Committee will return to Pakistan in December to perform a security survey to confirm adequate Pakistani protection of U.S. classified information.  Tanvir is eager to participate in this survey and is working to meet the security restrictions as stated in the LOA.  We should make it clear to Tanvir that we can speed up the approval process of Link-16 and DRFM with enhanced cooperation on this survey.  19. (C) We suggest Washington agencies address these issues as a package with Tanvir.  Of particular concern to the Pakistanis is the completion of the mid-life upgrades in a third country.  This can be resolved by U.S. engagement that reduces Pakistan's costs and involves Pakistani technicians in the third-country effort.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3779", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/18/2007 14:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004024  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN -- PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION COUNTDOWN  REF: ISLAMABAD 3779  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C)  Summary.  The next few days likely will determine whether or how President Musharraf can secure his re-election, and last-minute maneuvering is in full swing. Musharraf unquestionably has the simple majority of votes he needs in the current National and Provincial Assemblies; however, the Supreme Court may be the wild card as it prepares to rule on a bundle of pending cases challenging the President's candidacy.  Although Musharraf's advisors are increasingly optimistic about a positive verdict, the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) party is nonetheless preparing fallback options.  Musharraf's lead counsel announced in Court today that Musharraf would take off his uniform just before he renews his oath of office.  2. (C) Into this mix, the Election Commission announced on September 16 a surprise change in the rules governing candidate eligibility that would solve most of Musharraf's eligibility problems, but the court's decision would override any commission rules. We expect several days of drama before the issue is settled. End Summary.  3. (C)  Septel describes the presidential election process in detail.  As currently planned, the election must occur between September 15 and October 15.  Winning requires only a simple majority vote in an electoral college composed of the Senate, National and Provincial Assemblies.  The Election Commissioner oversees the process.  Reftel outlines the pending cases against Musharraf, which are primarily challenges against: (1) his right to hold the two concurrent offices of President and Chief of Army Staff; and (2) his right to ignore a two-year revolving door rule and run for president if he takes off his uniform.  SCENARIO A: COURT RULES FOR MUSHARRAF -------------------------------------  4. (C)  Even without Benazir Bhutto's PPP and other opposition parties, Musharraf has the simple majority he needs to win in the electoral college, but a group of opposition parties is threatening to undermine the credibility of the election by resigning from the assemblies in protest.  This would detract from Musharraf's victory. According to PML President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, he and Musharraf's other advisors are working to convince Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto to abstain but not walk out of the assemblies.  5. (C) Shujaat said the fundamental deal with Bhutto is an agreement to lift the pending corruption cases against her in exchange for her pledge that the PPP will not walk out.  If all goes according to the government's plan, Musharraf will be re-elected and then take off his uniform before being sworn in again as President.  PML Secretary General Mushahid Hussain told the press September 16 that the President would take off his uniform before November 15 and Musharraf's Attorney Sharifuddin Pirzada confirmed this in Court September 18.  6. (C)  In the first publicized meeting since the Chief Justice's reinstatement, Presidential Chief of Staff Lieutenant General (ret) Hamid Javed and Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry met September 14.  While the meeting was ostensibly held to discuss judicial vacancies that the Presidency quickly filled after the meeting, most analysts assume that the two discussed a way forward on cases challenging the President.  Some Musharraf advisors are optimistic about a favorable court verdict because they interpret a number of recent actions as positive signs of a more amenable Court: -- the Chief Justice recused himself from leading the court hearing on the cases challenging Musharraf; -- the Court rejected pleas to expand the bench that is hearing the bundled cases; and, -- the Court did not issue a much-expected contempt citation over last week's deportation of Nawaz Sharif. (Note: The fizzle of promised street demonstrations on behalf of Nawaz also calmed ruling party nerves.  End Note.)  7. (C)  Musharraf advisors credit this change in attitude to  ISLAMABAD 00004024  002 OF 003   their successful assuagement of the Chief Justice's ego by firing the Law Minister officially credited with launching the case against the Chief Justice, transferring the Islamabad Police Inspector General blamed officially for roughing up the Chief Justice, and having Javed publicly pay homage to the Chief Justice.  8. (C)  Attorney General (AG) Malik Qayyum echoed this positive outlook to A/DCM on September 18.  The opposition, he said, would complete arguments on the presidential cases on September 19; the GOP would make its case on September 20, and the Court would likely decide on September 21.  AG Qayyum said the government was confident of the votes of eight of nine judges on the panel.  He also believed the Chief Justice realized he had over-reached in terms of judicial activism against the President.  SCENARIO B: COURT RULES AGAINST MUSHARRAF OR DELAYS DECISION --------------------------------------------- ---------------  9. (C)  Not all Musharraf's advisors share this optimism. Shujaat told A/DCM on September 15 that he is worried that the Court will either not act positively or will delay a decision and keep the proverbial sword of Damocles hanging over Musharraf's head.  Shujaat is preparing a complicated series of fallback options if the decision is negative, including:  -- Dissolve the National Assembly and thus postpone the presidential election until after new national and provincial assembles are elected.  This would be legal and would buy Musharraf time to work out the proposed alliance with Bhutto.  However, it would not necessarily preclude Court action and, if invoked after a negative verdict, would subject Musharraf to significant criticism.  -- A repeat of the court shuffle Musharraf implemented in 1999 when he demanded the Supreme Court bench swear an oath of support.  Those who refused were replaced with a more pliable group.  The current Chief Justice was at the time one of the pliable group.  Given Musharraf's failure to fire the Chief Justice, this is not a viable option.  -- Some sort of extra-judicial action to shut down the courts.  Short of martial law, there is no way to stop the judiciary, and Musharraf has consistently insisted that he will not invoke martial law.  However, it is unlikely the government would attempt something just short martial law given the domestic and international reaction to the state of emergency.   Enter the Election Commission -----------------------------  10. (C)  The Election Commission announced September 16 that they had amended the Presidential Election Rules of 1988. The amendment opened the door for civil servants to run for president by removing the power of the Chief Election Commissioner to disqualify nominees on the basis of Article 63 of the Constitution.  Article 63 bars civil servants from running for office until they have been out of government service for at least two years; Article 63 is the basis for most of the pending court challenges against Musharraf.  12. (C)  Election Commission Secretary Kanwar Dilshad told PolOff on September 18 the Commission had amended its rules to conform with previous Supreme Court decisions allowing civil servants to contest presidential elections.  If the Court reversed its position, he said, then the Election Commission would act accordingly.  13. (C)  Attorney General Qayyum claimed that he had instructed the Election Commission \"weeks\" ago to revise its rules to coincide with Supreme Court rulings, but not single out the provision on candidate disqualifications.  The Commissioner changed only this one provision about ten days ago, according to Qayyum, and it was unfortunately leaked to the press.  Qayyum indicated the Election Commission's actions were unimportant because they would be subject ultimately to the courts.  14. (C)  Comment.  There is increasing optimism here among  ISLAMABAD 00004024  003 OF 003   Musharraf's supporters that the court battle is almost over. The government is banking on the fact that they have assuaged the Chief Justice's personal vanity and that he realizes that he has over-reached.  While the Election Commission's last-minute rule revision would not trump a contrary Supreme Court decision, it was designed to provide a boost to Musharraf supporters.  It may not have, since it prompted domestic and international criticism.  The Court could still deliver a nasty surprise to Musharraf.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4024", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/20/2007 11:41", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004064  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D   C O P Y   (602 TO 702, PARA 1)  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS: A PRIMER  REF: ISLAMABAD 4024  ISLAMABAD 00004064  001.2 OF 002   1. (SBU) On September 20, Pakistan's Election Commission announced that the presidential election will be held on October 6.  This cable outlines the process through which President Musharraf plans to be re-elected.   WHEN WILL THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS OCCUR?  -- On October 6.   WHO CAN NOMINATE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES?  -- Any member of the Senate, National Assembly, or the four Provincial Assemblies can nominate candidates for President. The nomination must be seconded by another member and consented to, in writing, by the candidate.  The Chief Election Commissioner oversees the presidential election process.  Nomination papers must be filed by September 27.   WHO CAN QUALIFY AS A PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE?  -- Presidential candidates must be Muslims of at least 45 years of age and meet the qualifications to become a member of the National Assembly.   WHO DECIDES IF PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES ARE QUALIFIED?  -- The Chief Election Commissioner makes the final qualification decision during a day of \"scrutiny.\"  The Election Commission recently revised its rules to allow civil servants (like President Musharraf, who is still serving as Chief of Army Staff) to contest as candidates, but the Supreme Court ultimately has the power to overrule the Commissioner's decisions.   WHAT IF ONLY ONE CANDIDATE QUALIFIES? IS THERE STILL AN ELECTION?  -- If the Chief Election Commissioner determines during his scrutiny that there is only one qualified candidate, he declares the candidate as President immediately.  If there is more than one candidate after the deadline for candidates withdrawals has passed, the Chief Election Commissioner proceeds with the election.   WHO VOTES FOR THE PRESIDENT?  -- Members of the Senate (100), National Assembly (342), and the Provincial Assemblies of Punjab (371), Sindh (168), Balochistan (65), and the Northwest Frontier Province (124).  -- Through a complex system of weighted voting in the Provincial Assemblies, up to 702 votes can be cast for president.   WHAT WILL HAPPEN ON ELECTION DAY?  -- The Senate, National Assembly, and four Provincial Assemblies each hold secret ballots.  After the poll, ballots are returned to the Chief Election Commissioner, who counts the votes and declares the winner.   WHAT IF THE OPPOSITION RESIGNS FROM THE NATIONAL AND/OR PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLIES? CAN THERE STILL BE A PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION?  -- Since there is no constitutional provision for delaying presidential elections due to resignations, abstentions, or even for the dissolution of Provincial Assemblies, the effect of a potential opposition walkout would be a political, not a procedural, problem.    ISLAMABAD 00004064  002 OF 002   RESULTS  -- The candidate with a simple majority wins.   CAN THE RESULTS OF A PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION BE CHALLENGED?  -- Article 41(6) of the Constitution states that \"The validity of the election of the president shall not be called in question by or before any court of other authority;\" however, the Supreme Court could rule that President Musharraf is not eligible to run for president.   WHAT SHOULD HAPPEN AFTER THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS ARE OVER?  -- The National Assembly's five-year term expires on November 15.  The Constitution calls for general elections to be within 60 days (by January 15, 2008).  After the National Assembly's term expires, the President will appoint a caretaker cabinet to oversee the government until general elections are held and new assemblies have taken office early next year.   2. (SBU) Comment: Now that the election schedule has been announced, the opposition parties will have to decide if they will field contesting candidates or boycott the exercise entirely.  Either way, as long as the national ruling coalition led by the Pakistan Muslim League sticks by President Musharraf, he will easily win.  However, the Supreme Court remains a wild card.  Decisions in pending cases challenging Musharraf's right to run for office are expected as early as this week (reftel).  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2007 10:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004083  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2017 TAGS: PREL, PK SUBJECT: DEPUTY SECRETARY'S PAKISTAN MEETINGS ON REGIONAL ISSUES  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C)  During a lunchtime session of the Strategic Dialogue September 13, the Deputy Secretary and Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan discussed regional issues.  Khan said that despite some successes, Pakistan is disappointed about the lack of progress on \"real\" issues in the Indo-Pak dialogue.  Khan quietly noted GOP concern about the U.S.-India Nuclear Agreement and expressed concern about resolving the Palestinian conflict and what he termed the standoff with Iran.  The Deputy Secretary briefed Khan on the situation in Afghanistan and Iraq.  End Summary.  India -----  2. (C) Khan confirmed that routine talks under the umbrella of the Composite Dialogue continue, and there was continuing progress on cultural, people-to-people and intelligence exchanges.  On trade, he said that Pakistan was implementing the South Asia Free Trade Agreement and has approved 1,076 of 4,000 items as tariff-free.  But India continued to throw up roadblocks in the form of multiple non-tariff barriers, especially on textiles.  An Indo-Pak working group has been established to review these issues but what is needed, according to Khan, is movement on the real issues of Kashmir, Siachen, and Sir Creek.  There has been some improvement on Kashmir, but it remains tense and the negotiations \"breakthrough\" has been exaggerated.  Pakistan has been disappointed on Siachen because India is resisting Islamabad's proposed compromise to establish a schedule for disengagement of the armed forces.  The continued human presence is eroding the glacier and creating environmental damage.  Progress on the Sir Creek mapping is the best confidence building success at the moment.   Khan said he did not see a possibility of resolving larger border transit issues until there was first movement on political questions.  There has been no progress on resolving Indo-Chinese border issues, but Khan believed that neither side wants to disrupt the status quo by using force.  Afghanistan ----------  3. (C) The Deputy Secretary noted the successful trilateral meeting in Kabul with Pakistani and Afghan Presidential Advisors Aziz and Rassoul.  On the security situation, there had been an intensification of Taliban activity but this did not necessarily mean they are stronger as NATO/ISAF forces had also increased their activities.  The Afghan forces remained modest in size but both their quality and quantity were expanding.  The Taliban have no political agenda. Narcotics production was a growing problem, especially in Helmand Province, and President Karzai was committed to eradication by forms other than spraying.  4. (C) The Deputy Secretary said he had sensed an improvement in President Karzai's attitude towards Pakistan, but he encouraged further efforts to improve bilateral relations. The Peace Jirga and proposals for follow-on jirgas was helpful.  On the Taliban's recent offer to open negotiations, he said that it was not yet clear who was speaking with what authority.  One should not rule out leaving the door open for those willing to walk through it.  In an earlier introductory meeting with Khan, the Deputy Secretary suggested that Musharraf and Karzai open the sub-jirga meeting as a way to demonstrate a continued bilateral commitment to the process. Khan was noncommittal in his response.  5. (C) Khan noted the need for Afghanistan to re-establish the national consensus that fell apart after the withdrawal of Soviet forces.  The Taliban problem and their Pashtun identity should be seen in this context.   There was a need for economic development and political outreach through the jirgas to isolate the militants and engage those Taliban elements who could be reconciled with the government.  Khan repeated the GOP mantra that there is no country other than Pakistan with a greater stake in a stable Afghanistan.  He acknowledged possibilities for linking Pakistan with Central Asia through Afghanistan, especially for gas pipelines. Pakistan, he said, continues to bear the burden of Afghan refugee camps where terrorist and criminal elements thrive. It was important to send the children home to get a proper non-madrassa education; he speculated that perhaps the UN should increase the repatriation stipend and assist this  ISLAMABAD 00004083  002 OF 002   process.  Iraq ----  6. (C) Khan noted he had seen Ambassador Crocker's recent congressional testimony and repeated that Pakistan believed a multi-national force acceptable to all Iraqi parties could help the Iraqi security situation.  The Deputy Secretary said he found Ambassador Crocker's statement encouraging.  We had made progress on security but it would take time.  There has been a growing realization in many circles in Washington that we cannot abruptly pull out.  Middle East -----------  7. (C) Khan expressed concern about the continuing situation in Palestine and \"your\" standoff with Iran.  These issues aggravate the situation and have a spillover effect.  The Deputy Secretary said that the Secretary is personally committed to making a sustained effort on Palestinian-Israeli talks.  On Iran, we have serious concerns and are not encouraged by Iran's current behavior.  They are using diplomacy to buy time to extend their nuclear program and their support for radical elements in the Middle East.  We have found evidence of their shipment of equipment to the Taliban.  U.S.-India Nuclear Agreement ----------------------------  8. (C) Khan noted that the U.S. understood Pakistan's concern with the U.S.-India Nuclear Agreement.  Pakistan did not want India to be able to use spent fuel from civilian reactors to enhance its nuclear weapons capacity.  The main thrust of Pakistan's concern was to prevent an arms race in South Asia.  Khan said that Pakistan had approached the Nuclear Suppliers Group to seek support because Pakistan needs civilian nuclear capacity to meet growing energy needs.  Ambassador Durrani noted that the National Command Authority statement on the U.S.-India Agreement included nothing new; Khan indicated he had been unaware of any promises Pakistan made not to comment publicly on the Agreement.  The Deputy Secretary noted that the Agreement was subject to continuing controversy in India itself; we were addressing Pakistan's energy needs in the Strategic Dialogue.  9. (U) Meeting attendees included: (U.S.) Deputy Secretary John Negroponte, D/Mary Sue Conaway, SCA/Caitlin Hayden and Embassy Political Counselor Candace Putnam (notetaker). (Pakistan)  Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan, Pakistan Ambassador to the U.S. Mahmud Ali Durrani, MFA Secretary (Americas) Shahid Kamal, Secretary, Prime Minister's Secretariat Zamir Akram, MFA DG (UN) Attiya Mahmood, MFA Spokesperson Tasnim Aslam, MFA DG (Americas) Sohail Mahmood, MFA DG (Disarmament) Qazi Khalilullah, MFA Director (FS Office) Babar Amin, Director (Americas) Mansoor Ahmad Khan and Assistant Director (Americas) Haseeb bin Aziz.  10. (U) The Deputy Secretary's staff has cleared this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2007 10:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004084  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, PTER, PK SUBJECT: DEPUTY SECRETARY'S BILATERAL MEETINGS IN PAKISTAN  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C)  Summary.  Deputy Secretary Negroponte held bilateral meetings September 12 during the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue with Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan and Foreign Minister Kasuri.  Khan raised concerns about the negative impact of the U.S. NIE, the 9/11 Commission legislation's Pakistan provisions and critical administration statements about Pakistan's commitment to the war on terror.  He also raised what the GOP sees as U.S. violations of the F-16 sale agreement, and concern over the U.S.-India Nuclear Agreement.  Both sides discussed the merits of a Bilateral Investment Treaty vs. a Free Trade Agreement.  Khan also mentioned concern about the U.S. travel warning and visa approval delays and proposed adding a fifth pillar on agriculture to the Strategic Dialogue.  In a separate meeting, the Deputy Secretary briefed Foreign Minister Kasuri on the situation in  SIPDIS Afghanistan.  End Summary.  Defense/Nuclear Issues ----------------------  2. (C)  Khan thanked the U.S. for continuing financial and developmental assistance and noted we enjoyed good counter-terrorism cooperation.  He said that the GOP understood that it had the support of the U.S. administration, but the 9/11 Commission legislation's Pakistan-related provisions had had a negative impact on public perceptions of the relationship.  He asked how the law's reporting requirements would impact current and post-2009 assistance.  Presidents Bush and Musharraf have an excellent relationship, but what happens in the next administration?  He urged that the reports be sensitive to GOP apprehensions.  3. (C)  Khan said we agreed on the need to combat al Qaeda, but the NIE's assessment and critical administration statements weakened the GOP's hand in achieving our mutual goals.  Recounting the history and legacy of the fight against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, Khan noted the GOP faces difficult challenges in the tribal areas. He thanked the U.S. for its plan to assist the GOP in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) but cautioned that it would take time to implement and would require a comprehensive military/political/development strategy.  Khan urged that \"friends be patient while we are engaged\" and noted that from its experience in Afghanistan, the U.S. should understand the challenge.  Ambassador Durrani raised the NIE's \"safehaven\" language and suggested it would be helpful to sit down with U.S. officials to discuss these reports.  4. (C)  Khan also raised GOP concerns that the U.S. was undermining the terms of the F-16 sale agreement.  Citing concerns about the release of critical technology for the F-16s, Durrani noted that this was both a cost issue and one of trust.  Khan said Pakistan was also concerned that $350 million in pending Coalition Support Fund requests had not been approved.  5. (C)  On nuclear issues, Khan briefly noted GOP needs for alternative energy sources and said the U.S. understood GOP concerns about the U.S.-India Nuclear Agreement. Khan specifically asked if the U.S. could approve licenses for the purchase of a Loose Parts Monitoring System, which was IAEA-approved safety equipment, for the Chasma Civilian Nuclear Power Plant.  6. (C)  The Deputy Secretary recognized GOP sacrifices in the war on terror, urged that U.S. statements not be taken out of context and agreed to convey GOP concerns to Washington.  On the NIE, he said there was no question that al Qaeda was exploiting the border area to launch attacks on U.S. and coalition forces.  He said the decision to require that F-16 mid-life upgrades be performed outside of Pakistan could not be revisited.  He noted that the U.S. plan for the FATA was designed to support Pakistani efforts and that we were looking for ways to be even more supportive.  Ambassador Patterson noted that the U.S. was ready to release $200 million for pending Coalition Support Fund requests, but we had additional questions about $140 million that we needed answered.  We hoped that Chief Air Marshall Tanvir's upcoming trip to Washington would provide an opportunity to answer GOP  ISLAMABAD 00004084  002 OF 003   questions about the F-16 sale.  BIT ---  7. (C)  Khan said that a Bilateral Investment Treaty would impose onerous reporting requirements and its MFN obligations would require that the same deal be extended to forty other countries if it were a stand-alone agreement.  If it could be part of a larger framework like a Free Trade Agreement, however, there were greater possibilities.  Khan noted that especially with the expected creation of Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZ), it would be important for U.S. investors to have an overarching framework.  Khan also noted that President Musharraf had signed an Anti-Money Laundering Ordinance.  8. (C)  The Deputy Secretary said that there were both procedural and substantive challenges.  The administration's fast track trade authority has expired, and there are already four pending FTAs to be approved in the Congress before the end of the administration.  We would keep looking for opportunities.  He asked Khan to clarify that the problem was the \"stand-alone\" treaty and wondered if there was a way to combine the two approaches.  Consular Issues ---------------  9. (C)  Khan noted the difficulties Pakistanis, especially students, face in receiving visas.  He also voiced concern about the U.S. Travel Advisory for Pakistan, saying that other countries keyed their warnngs to America's.  Our advisory was keeping the tourists away.  Khan noted there were still six Pakistanis in Guatanamo but hoped their cases could be closed soon.  He confirmed that approximately 60 Pakistanis had already been returned from Guantanamo. Ambassador said we shared Khan's concern about assisting students, and business travelers, in getting more rapid visa Qqproval, and were trying to speed up the process.  Agriculture as a Fifth Pillar -----------------------------  10. (C)  Finally, Khan proposed that the Strategic Dialogue be expanded to include agricultural issues in addition to the current topics of energy, education, economic develoment and science and technology cooperation.  The Deputy Secretary asked the GOP to provide a proposal for the USG to review.  Meeting with FM Kasuri ----------------------  11. (C)  In a later meeting, FM Kasuri thanked the Deputy Secretary for leading the U.S. delegation to the Strategic  SIPDIS Dialogue and for proposing they recur every six months.  He agreed with FS Khan's suggestions to add agriculture as an additional pillar to the discussions.  12. (C)  The Depurty Secretary said the situation in Afghanistan was improving, but fighting has intensified due to increased activity by ISAF/NATO forces and the insurgents.  There are still areas, e.g., Helmand Province, where government contol is weak.  It was a mixed picture, but institutionally things were improving.  The drug problem, however, was getting worse, and Helmand was key.  We were encouraged by the Peace Jirga and the trilateral meeting with Pakistani and Afghan Presidential Advisors Aziz and Rassoul. We hope for rapid follow-up on the sub-jirga meetings. Regarding the latest Taliban offer to negotiate, the Deputy Secretary said that we first needed to determine who was  SIPDIS talking with what authority, and we wanted to get the GOA's views before proceeding.  But the United States did not rule out talking to those who sought peaceful reconciliation within the Afghan political system.  13. (U)  Participants for the lunch:  (U.S.) Ambassador, Deputy Secretary John Negroponte, D/Mary Sue Conaway, D/Ted Wittenstein, SCA/Caitlin Hayden, S/CT Robin McClellan and Embassy Political Counselor Candace Putnam (notetaker). (Pakistan) Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan, Pakistan Ambassador to the U.S. Mahmud Ali Durrani, MFA Secretary (Americas) Shahid Kamal, Secretary, Prime Minister's Secretariat Zamir  ISLAMABAD 00004084  003 OF 003   Akram, MFA Spokesperson Tasnim Aslam, MFA DG (Americas) Sohail Mahmood, MFA Secretary (Afghanistan) Khalid Khattak, MFA Secretary (Asia Pacific) Massod Khalild, MFA DG (UN) Attiya Mahomood, MFA DG (Disarmament) Qazi Khalilullah, MFA Director (FS Office) Babar Amin, MFA Director (Americas) Mansoor Ahmad Khan.  Participants for the Kasuri meeting: (U.S.) Ambassador, Deputy Secretary John Negroponte, S/CT Coordinator Dell Dailey, D/Mary Sue Conaway, SCA/Caitlin Hayden and Embassy Political Counselor Candace Putnam (notetaker).  (Pakistan)  Foreign Minister Kasuri, MFA DG (FM's Office) Khalil Mahmood, MFA DG (Americas) Sohail Mahmood, MFA Director (Americas) Mansoor Ahmad Khan.  14. (U)  The Deputy Secretary's staff has cleared this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2007 10:08", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004085  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF TELLS DEPUTY SECRETARY PAKISTAN IS COMMITTED TO FIGHT AL QAEDA, TALIBAN  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C) Summary.  During a September 13 meeting with the Deputy Secretary, President Musharraf reiterated his intention, absent intervention by the Chief Justice, to be re-elected before October 15 by the current National and Provincial Assemblies.  He explained the nature and required solutions to what he described as the very different threats posed by al Qaeda, the Taliban and extremism.  He expressed frustration that the media and some in Washington did not adequately understand the complex realities of these threats and were questioning Pakistan's commitment to combat them. Musharraf supported speedy follow-up to the Peace Jirga by choosing the right people to participate in the sub-jirgas. Musharraf also urged the U.S. not to undermine the agreement to sell Pakistan F-16 aircraft.  End Summary.  2. (C) The Deputy Secretary, accompanied by Ambassador, SCA Assistant Secretary Richard Boucher, and S/CT Coordinator Dell Dailey met President Musharraf on September 13. Musharraf congratulated Negroponte on leading a successful second session of the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue (septel).  Musharraf outlined his priorities as: (1) on the political front, to smooth the run up to his re-election as president and then complete parliamentary elections; and (2) after the elections, to focus on political reconciliation, good governance, sustaining economic growth and fighting terrorism.  Re-Election Scenario --------------------  3. (C) Musharraf said that he expected the Chief Justice to \"play dirty\" in attempting to disqualify Musharraf as a candidate.  He said that he could be re-elected in uniform and before the current assemblies \"legally and constitutionally.\"  The only question is whether he will take off his uniform before or after he takes office again.  But it would depend on the Chief Justice; Musharraf was hoping that he could engage with him in a positive way in terms of the pending cases.  Musharraf said the process of the presidential election would require 18 days; to finish by the October 15 deadline, the process must begin at the latest on September 27.  Musharraf reiterated that he has the majority of votes required in the current National and Provincial Assemblies, but it cast a \"moral\" doubt on the election if the opposition resigned en masse.  4. (C) On the deportation of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, the Deputy Secretary noted that the administration understood what had happened, but not everyone in the U.S. appreciated the nuances of Pakistani politics.  It was important for Musharraf to be as inclusive as possible and ensure elections were free and fair.  5. (C) Musharraf said that after the elections, it would be important to include Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman in the governing coalition.  Musharraf described him as moderate and pliable.  It would be important, especially if the agreement with Bhutto succeeds, to avoid the optics of religious vs. non-religious political groupings, and Rehman can be helpful in splitting the religious parties.  Afghanistan/India -----------------  6. (C) Negroponte noted the successful trilateral meeting he hosted on September 11 for Pakistan and Afghan Presidential Advisors Tariq Aziz and Rassoul.  He said he was encouraged by what he saw as the shifting attitude and lower rhetoric of President Karzai towards Pakistan.  He urged that both sides name and organize meetings of the sub-jirga groups that had been agreed at the Peace Jirga.  7. (C) Musharraf said he agreed and will go ahead with selecting Pakistan's group of 25 for the sub-jirga; these should be the \"right\" people with good influence.  But he suggested it would be even better to have a jirga with five to six participants on both sides to lead their fellow tribesmen; Pakistan had raised this idea with Kabul.  The most important outcome of the Peace Jirga, according to  ISLAMABAD 00004085  002 OF 003   Musharraf, was the Afghan recognition that they needed to talk to the \"opposition,\" and this would be more successful with a smaller sub-jirga group.  8. (C) Musharraf asked the U.S. to intervene on one issue of real concern--the \"deliberate\" attempt of Kabul and New Delhi to destabilize Balochistan.  He insisted that Pakistan had ample proof that India and Afghanistan were involved in efforts to provide weapons, training and funding for Baloch extremists through Brahamdagh Bugti and Baloch Marri, two Baloch nationalists, who were living in Kabul. \"We have letters instructing who to give what weapons to whom.\" Musharraf said he had raised this with Karzai, who replied \"give me time and I will address it.\"  Musharraf said he was still waiting.  Assistant Secretary Boucher noted that he had recently raised the issue with Rassoul.  Musharraf added \"If India wants to continue, let's see what our options will be.\"  Negroponte asked if, after the elections, there was a possibility to move forward on negotiations with India. Musharraf said yes, especially on Kashmir, where the population was getting restless.  FATA: Al Qaeda, Taliban, Extremism Are Different Problems --------------------------------------------- ------------  9. (C) Negroponte noted that he had just received Embassy Islamabad's briefing on our plans to support the GOP integrated security and development plan for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).  Musharraf said the GOP strategy was good, but its application would take time and patience.  Noting statements by the media and some administration officials, Musharraf said that Pakistan did not need to be told by the U.S. to take more action against terrorism because \"we know it is in our own interests.\"  He said he gives this message every day, everywhere to thousands in Pakistan, and they are starting to listen.  10. (C) Musharraf outlined the differing threats of al Qaeda, the Taliban and extremism.  These, he asserted, were three distinct issues that too often are confused by the media or \"lower-level\" U.S. officials who do not understand the complexities of the challenge Pakistan is facing.  Al Qaeda is in the mountains, especially in North and South Waziristan and Bajaur, and the GOP is \"trying to deal with the locals to get them out.\"  The GOP is telling the locals to avoid the trouble that comes with associating with foreigners, and there has been some success especially in expelling the Uzbeks.  Now, Musharraf wants the tribes to expel the Arabs. The strategy is to do selected attacks and follow up with political efforts; here, too, Fazlur Rehman can help.  But the mountains absorb lots of troops, so in the short-term, Musharraf has put a brigade in North Waziristan and two more in the settled areas on the FATA border.  At some later point, the GOP will move troops into South Waziristan; the goal there was to break Baitullah Mehsud and his organization.  11. (C) Turning to the Taliban, Musharraf said this was a different issue.  Pakistan could fight al Qaeda with troops, but the Taliban were being supported by locals opposed to the foreign presence in Afghanistan.  Military action against these locals, explained Musharraf, would require \"fighting against our own people,\" and this was very sensitive.  So, the GOP was reinforcing the borders and telling the locals they had no right to cross the border.  This problem required a combined military, political and administrative solution. On the politics, again, Fazlur Rehman could help.  Musharraf speculated, however, that if Washington heard he was meeting with Rehman, he would be accused of aiding and abetting religious extremists.  On the administrative/development side, Musharraf said he was reinvigorating the political agent system, building boarding schools that could remove students from extremist influence, and creating jobs in the marble and olive oil industries.  Foreign Secretary Khan reiterated Pakistan's concern about including Article 347 and 348 on textiles (cotton trousers) in pending Reconstruction Opportunity Zone (ROZ) legislation.  Musharraf noted that Pakistan was also expanding and better equipping the Frontier Corps, Levies and Khassadar forces.  12. (C) Musharraf described extremism in Pakistani society as yet another facet of the challenge, and this required  ISLAMABAD 00004085  003 OF 003   changing mindsets.  He had attacked the problem in several ways.  The GOP had increased control over mosques, banning loudspeakers, collection plates, posters and distribution of pro-jihad literature.  The police now understood the importance of this activity; there had been a 90 percent success in shutting down these activities.  Musharraf said he had banned 23 organizations (some before 9/11), but they keep changing their names so this was a constant challenge.  He has had some success on madrassa reform by introducing new curricula and registering 75 percent of madrassas with the government.  The GOP has introduced new secular subjects; 70 percent of the registered madrassas have accepted the new program; and some have begun teaching these new secular subjects.  13. (C) Musharraf thanked the U.S. for approving the five-year $750 million plan for FATA projects but said that the projects and ROZs had not yet materialized.  Negroponte noted that we were making progress on the ROZ legislation and had actually proposed more than $750 million over five years in assistance.  The funding process moves slowly, but the Pakistanis would be seeing results soon.  Musharraf replied that the perceptions were different in Pakistan, and said that U.S. statements and the 9/11 Commission legislation showed that the U.S. had doubts about Pakistan's intentions. Why, Musharraf wondered again, did the media and the U.S. believe he was playing a \"double game\" and not doing enough?  F-16s: Don't Violate Our Deal -----------------------------  14. (C) In closing, Musharraf said that the Pakistan Air Force was upset over what they felt was the U.S. undermining \"by design\" the agreement to sell Pakistan F-16s.  Musharraf said, \"don't violate this deal as it would unnecessarily upset bilateral relations.\"  15. (U) The Deputy Secretary's staff has cleared this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2007 10:14", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004086  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER TELLS NEGROPONTE: NO MORE F-16 PAYMENTS, READY TO RE-OPEN INVESTMENT TREATY TALKS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: During a September 14 meeting with Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte, Prime Minister Shaukat  SIPDIS Aziz voiced his government's frustration with what Pakistan perceives as changes in the terms of sale of U.S. F-16s to Pakistan.  Aziz said that unless the U.S. changes some of its current provisions, Pakistan will stop payment for breach of contract.  Citing the importance of creating jobs in the tribal areas, Aziz also pressed for inclusion of categories 347 and 348 in the Reconstruction Opportunity Zone legislation.  Acknowledging that this may not be possible, Aziz agreed to do his part to re-energize bilateral investment treaty talks as an alternative way to spur U.S. investment in Pakistan.  On the political front, Aziz emphasized Pakistan's commitment to free and fair elections and to using a holistic approach to the mitigate security and development problems in the tribal areas.  Aziz also requested U.S. assistance in rebuilding Pakistan's \"trust deficit\" with Afghanistan and in helping Pakistan meet its growing energy needs.  End Summary.  ------------------------------------------- F-16s: The U.S. Keeps Moving the Goal Posts -------------------------------------------  2. (C) On September 14, Prime Minster Shaukat Aziz met with Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte, Assistant Secretary for Central and South Asian Affairs Richard  SIPDIS Boucher, Coordinator for Counterterrorism Dell Dailey, and the Ambassador.  Aziz asked for Negroponte's help in enlisting \"serious high level attention\" to the terms of sale of U.S. F-16s to Pakistan.  Pakistan's Air Force feels that U.S. requirements for mid-life upgrades outside of Pakistan and crypto keys for the aircraft amount to new requirements not envisioned in the original contract. \"The goal posts have moved,\" Aziz said, and if the U.S. does not reconsider its requirements, Pakistan will consider the U.S. to be in breach of contract and will discontinue payments.  Aziz added that Pakistan's Air Chief Marshal is traveling soon to Washington to try to resolve the issue.  3. (C) Negroponte replied that he understood the long history behind the F-16 sale and that the United States wants to make this deal work -- perhaps by working with Pakistan on determining which country would be acceptable to complete the mid-life upgrades.  --------------------------------------------- ------ Negroponte: Investment Treaty More Feasible Than Textile Exemptions to Generate Jobs in Tribal Areas --------------------------------------------- ------  4. (C) Aziz thanked Negroponte for U.S. support of Pakistan's multifaceted approach to mitigating the security and development problems in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  Aziz said that the biggest return on dollars spent in the tribal areas will be through the planned U.S. Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs), which will provide jobs for youth who would otherwise be vulnerable to the influence of extremist rhetoric.  5. (C) Aziz welcomed progress toward introducing the legislation to Congress, but said that the key to success will be in attracting investors once the legislation is in place.  Inclusion of category 347/348 textiles (cotton trousers) in the ROZ legislation would immediately attract ROZ investment, Aziz said.  Negroponte replied that inclusion of 347 and 348 would be difficult, but it is still possible to attract U.S. investment by finalizing a bilateral investment treaty.  6. (C) Aziz said that Pakistan still has serious concerns whether Pakistan can conclude a bilateral investment treaty with the U.S., and that there is little political will to do so right now.  However, if the U.S. is interested in re-starting talks, Pakistan is willing to do so.  Aziz suggested that the first step would be for the U.S. to set a date for a video teleconference between U.S. and Pakistani officials and, if progress is made, face-to-face negotiations  ISLAMABAD 00004086  002 OF 003   could resume.  ------------------------------------------ Pakistan Committed to Fair Elections and Making Tribal Areas More Secure, Developed ------------------------------------------  7. (C) Aziz said that the government is keen to ensure fair elections, since no subsequent government would have the moral authority to govern without them.  The cabinet just unanimously supported having the current assemblies elect the next president, Aziz said, because the Pakistan Muslim League believes that if Musharraf is re-elected their party will receive a 10-15 percent boost at the polls in the upcoming general elections.  Aziz declined to go into detail about whether/when President Musharraf intends to remove his uniform, but said that he is hopeful that the Supreme Court -- which has become \"intrusive and aggressive\" lately -- will not interfere with upcoming elections and will let the ballot box decide who should govern next.  Negroponte said that the U.S. is watching Pakistan's evolving political landscape with great interest, and that we have an interest in Pakistan's stability and political evolution.  8. (C) Aziz said that Pakistan is committed to eliminating terrorism. \"We do not want Pakistan to be used as a sanctuary,\" Aziz said.  The government has to strike a balance in securing the tribal areas, he said.  People who live there respect the power of the gun, but they also need to be provided with an alternative way to live so that young, unemployed men are not influenced by militants.  The cabinet's recent decision to launch a crash project to build schools in 10 target areas will be one way of addressing this problem, Aziz said.  The schools would provide free books, meals and a monthly stipend, and will provide an alternative for parents who otherwise would have no choice but to send their children to madrassas (religious schools) that may be teaching violent extremist rhetoric.  Negroponte acknowledged Pakistan's commitment to eliminating terrorism, and said that the U.S. has learned a lot from Pakistan over the past several years and would like to support Pakistan's holistic approach to the problem.  President Bush's biggest frustration, Negroponte said, is that funding for the tribal areas is not being delivered faster.  --------------------------------------------- -- Rebuilding the \"Trust Deficit\" With Afghanistan --------------------------------------------- --  9. (C) Aziz told Negroponte that more could be done on the Afghan side of the border to control the Taliban and al Qaeda.  Pakistan sees them as a threat because they are looting Pakistan's own people. \"We are engaging the enemy head on,\" Aziz said, \"but the game of hide and seek will continue unless Afghan stakeholders emerge to help control them.\"  Afghanistan's skyrocketing drug production is the biggest fuel for global terror, he added.  10. (C) While his government has good relations with Afghanistan's President Karzai, they are frustrated at the Afghan government's failure to take action against \"criminals.\" (Note: The \"criminals\" are presumably Brahamdagh Bugti and Baloch Marri, two Baloch nationalists whom the GOP would like extradited back to Pakistan.  End Note.)  They have obtained fake Afghan passports and have traveled to Delhi, India and back to Afghanistan, Aziz said.  They are now living in close proximity to Karzai's residence, Aziz continued, and the Afghan government has yet to take action against them.  At this point, there is a clear need to rebuild the \"trust deficit\" with Afghanistan, Aziz said.  --------------------------------------------- -------- Pakistan Wants Help In Meeting Growing Energy Demands --------------------------------------------- --------  11. (C) Aziz said that demand for energy is growing quickly and that Pakistan is struggling to meet those needs.  One source is Iran -- and Pakistan has just signed a memorandum of understanding to increase its imported electricity from Iran from 100 megawatts to 1,000 (\"out of acute desparation,\"  ISLAMABAD 00004086  003 OF 003   Aziz said, \"because they are unreliable suppliers.\"). Pakistan is also talking to Tajikistan about electicity imports and Turkmenistan about gas.  Aziz added that dealing with Turkmenistan has been frustrating because the government has not been able to give potential investors a clear idea of the level of gas reserves in the country and because Gazprom has discouraged outside interest in the reserves.  12. (C) Aziz asked that the U.S. consider assistance in developing Pakistan's civlian nuclear capacity (a civilian-run nuclear reactor could even be operated by a foreign investor, he said).  Pakistan's coal reserves also need to be developed, he said. Negroponte replied that the U.S. may be able to provide assistance in the way of clean coal or coal gasification technology.  13. (U) The Deputy Secretary's staff has cleared this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3027", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/21/2007 13:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004092  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/21/2017 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: BIN LADEN'S CALL TO ARMS FALLS FLAT  REF: ISLAMABAD 3027  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On September 20, al-Qaeda leaders released two new tapes calling for Pakistanis to wage holy war against President Musharraf in retaliation for the Red Mosque operation in July. The government has dismissed the threats and vowed to continue its counter-terrorism strategy. It is too early to judge the long-term effect of the tapes on military operations but, so far, the tapes have sparked little interest in a populace focused on upcoming elections. End summary.  2. (C) On September 20, Al-Qaeda leader Usama bin Laden released a new audio message calling on Muslims in Pakistan to wage holy war against President Musharraf, his government, and his army. He called President Musharraf an apostate for storming the Red Mosque (Lal Masjid) in Islamabad in July 2007 (REFTEL). A related tape was also released by al-Qaeda's Ayman al-Zawahiri also calling for jihad against President Musharraf and his army. He described the killing of Red Mosque leader Maulana Ghazi and the demolition of the attached madrassa as \"soaking the history of the Pakistani army in shame which can only be washed away by retaliation against the killers of Ghazi.\"  3. (C) The official government response to the tapes has been largely dismissive. Military spokesman Major General Waheed Arshad confirmed the armed forces' continued commitment to fighting extremists and terrorists. He said that despite any threats or insults, the whole nation of Pakistan was supportive of the fight against terrorism and with the army. Arshad also confirmed that the there would be no change in policy in response to bin Laden's newest video.  4. (C) Though the tapes have been front page news in Western press, the stories barely made the news in Pakistan. News about the tapes has been slow to appear on Pakistani news channels and did not make the front pages of most Urdu and English-language newspapers in Pakistan. The public response has been largely non-existent and most commentators are dismissing this as another in the long line of bin Laden tapes. Islamabad news today was dominated by Supreme Court cases about President Musharraf's re-election eligibility and the recent announcement of presidential election dates (SEPTEL).  5. (SBU) Unrelated to the al-Qaeda tapes, a few hundred madrassa students are protesting outside the Red Mosque today in Islamabad. They are demanding that the government re-open the mosque for Friday prayers and special Ramadan prayers. The police continue to surround the area near the mosque and the protests have remained peaceful.  6. (C) Comment: Bin Laden carefully chose his references. The Red Mosque operation remains a contentious issue here as liberals believe the President took too long to react, extremists remain outraged, and the majority who oppose terrorism were nonetheless uncomfortable with a military operation against a mosque.  It is too early to judge the long-term effects of the video on military operations, but for now Pakistanis are more focused on the upcoming elections.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4064", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/23/2007 5:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004094  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/21/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OCTOBER 6  REF: ISLAMABAD 4064  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On September 20, Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) set the presidential election for October 6.  This confirms that Musharraf will seek re-election, in uniform, before the current assemblies.  Opposition parties issued the predictable objections, but the move demonstrated Musharraf's growing confidence that the Supreme Court will rule in his favor.  The Court will resume hearings Monday on the current bundle of cases challenging Musharraf's eligibility to seek re-election.  Meanwhile, time is running out for a pre-election \"deal\" between Bhutto and Musharraf. End summary.  2. (C) Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) announced September 20 that Pakistan's presidential election will take place October 6.  Reftel outlines a process where the Election Commission oversees voting by an electoral college composed of National and Provincial Assemblies.  The Commissioner will rule by September 29 on the eligibility of the candidates.  To date, only one possible opponent, a lone physician, has announced his intention to challenge Musharraf.  3.  (C)  Opposition parties and civil society groups renewed their objections and again called upon the Supreme Court to disqualify Musharraf.  Some see Musharraf's announcement that he will remove his uniform after the election as more of a threat to guarantee his re-election than as a welcome opportunity to move towards civilian rule.  4.  (C)  Opposition groups also renewed their threats to walk out of the National and Provincial Assemblies.  As noted in reftel, Musharraf has the votes to win the required simple majority; the question now is the extent an opposition walkout would weaken his credibility.  The opposition has been unable to unite on this issue so far; their ability to embarrass Musharraf over the vote will depend on whether the Pakistan People's Party joins them.  5.  (C)  The Supreme Court denied a petition by Tehrik-e-Insaf Chairman Imran Khan challenging the ECP's right to alter the rules governing eligibility of candidates.  On Monday, the Court will resume hearing arguments in the bundled cases challenging Musharraf's right to seek re-election in uniform.  We expect a decision next week. Meanwhile, police with riot shields grossly outnumbered today's fifty MMA religious block protesters in front of the Supreme Court.  6.  (C)  Comment:  Musharraf's decision to move forward on setting a date for presidential elections even before the Supreme Court rules on his cases demonstrates his growing confidence in a positive verdict.  We expect to find out next week whether that confidence is misplaced.  Meanwhile, time is running out for a pre-election \"deal\" between Bhutto and Musharraf. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE124244", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/24/2007 11:17", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004106  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  SCA/PB VES-ci  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS:  AMGT, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: UPDATED CONTACT INFORMATION FOR EMBASSY ISLAMABAD  REF: STATE 124244  1. (U) Per reftel request, updated contact information provided below.  2. (SBU) Embassy Islamabad leadership:  Ambassador Anne W. Patterson O: +92-51-208-2500 H: +92-51-208-2505 C: +92-300-856-2140  Deputy Chief of Mission Peter W. Bodde O: +92-51-208-2502 H: +92-51-208-2507 C: +92-300-856-1306  Political Counselor E. Candace Putnam O: +92-51-208-2294 H: +92-51-227-7346 C: +92-300-856-4708  Economic and Commercial Affairs Counselor Amy Holman O: +92-51-208-2647 H: +92-51-227-7331 C: +92-300-501-8812  Public Affairs Counselor Kay Mayfield O: +92-51-208-2040 H: +92-51-282-3264 C: +92-300-850-1558  Consul General Michael Chang O: +92-51-208-2160 H: +92-51-220-1025 C: +92-300-856-6451  Regional Security Officer Randall Bennett O: +92-51-208-2748 H: +92-51-285-3084 C: +92-300-855-5697  Management Counselor Floyd Cable O: +92-51-208-2688 H: +92-51-227-8120 C: +92-302-854-6745  Narcotics Affairs Director Richard Adams O: +92-51-208-2337 H: +92-51-287-7607 C: +92-300-500-1047  USAID Mission Director Anne Aarnes O: +92-51-208-2792 H: +92-51-227-7153 C: +92-300-850-7806  3. (U) Key Government of Pakistan officials:  President General Pervez Musharraf O: +92-51-920-6061 H: +92-51-927-0266  Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz O: +92-51-920-6111 H: +92-51-922-2666  Foreign Minister Mian Khurshid Mahmud Kasuri O: +92-51-921-0335 H: +92-51-922-2227  Foreign Secretary Riaz Muhammad Khan O: +92-51-921-1942 H: +92-51-920-1681  Chief of Staff to President, Lt. Gen. (ret.) Hamid Javaid O: +92-51-922-1388 H: +92-51-927-2820  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/24/2007 14:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 004107  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2017 TAGS: PTER, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: DEPUTY SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH PAKISTAN'S INTERIOR MINISTER SHERPAO  ISLAMABAD 00004107  001.2 OF 004   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: On September 13, Deputy Secretary Negroponte met with Minister of Interior Sherpao.  Sherpao praised the recent jirgas with Afghanistan and said Pakistan would move quickly to appoint its follow up team.  Sherpao briefed the participants on the ongoing efforts by both the Pakistani military and the Interior Ministry to \"pressurize\" Al-Qaeda and their supporters in the border areas.  Pakistan is trying to build up rapidly its local security forces in border areas.  End Summary.  COUNTERING MILITANTS IN THE TRIBAL AREAS ----------------------------------------  2.  (C)  At a meeting also attended by Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher, Coordinator for Counterterrorism Ambassador Dailey, and Pakistan's Secretary of the Interior Ch. Zafar Warraich, Sherpao explained that since September 11, 2001 Pakistan has been focused on fighting terrorism in Pakistan, with special attention on the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  He understood that Al-Qaeda leaders had come to Pakistan and even been caught near Islamabad.  However, Sherpao emphasized that the problem was more complex than simple terrorism. Disparate groups such as Al-Qaeda, Taliban militants, and sectarian militants all operated separately but had various connections with each other.  Sherpao noted that these groups exploit every political event, such as the Red Mosque incident, to unleash more terrorism in the country.  3. (C) Sherpao noted that the military operations over the last few years have marginalized al-Qaeda as an organization in Pakistan.  However, this did not mean that terrorism was eliminated.  The militants still exist in small independent groups with their own leaders, sometimes working in concert with other independent groups.  Their influence in certain parts of the Tribal Areas has grown and they have engulfed the local populations.  The violence is starting to spread into the settled districts of the Northwest Frontier Province.  4. (C) In response to the violence, the Pakistan military and security forces have conducted over 80 major operations and many small scale ones, according to Sherpao.  He stressed that the resolve to fight terrorism in all forms will continue.  Minister Sherpao said that since the breakdown of the North Waziristan agreement there have been more operations in that area that have killed over 1000 militants, and 100 security forces have lost their lives.  5. (C) Minister Sherpao explained that after the North Waziristan agreement there had been an increase in criminal activity because the checkposts had been abandoned. Therefore, the agreement has been abandoned, and the military has come back to the checkposts and increased scrimmages with militants and criminals.  Sherpao stressed that there are currently more than 100,000 troops and security forces in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  6. (C) The major players in the militancy include Baitullah Mehsud, who Sherpao said was behind the suicide bombings in Islamabad and the kidnapping of troops in South Waziristan. He said militant leaders like Mehsud had increasingly become brazen in their activities in South and North Waziristan. Sherpao said that all the agreements with the militants had been abolished and now the government was putting the maximum pressure on militant Taliban.  He said that in the future there would be no agreements with the militants, only undertakings.  The government will keep increased pressure on the militants, and only alleviate the pressure when they undertake to stop all subversive, violent, or cross-border activities.  Sherpao said that the government has identified all the local Taliban leaders and troops are focusing on them.  Some of these militant leaders have a nexus with the Taliban in Afghanistan, while others are concentrating on Pakistan.  TALIBANIZATION: SPREADING TO THE SETTLED AREAS --------------------------------------------- --  ISLAMABAD 00004107  002.2 OF 004    7. (C) Minister Sherpao discussed the increased suicide bombings and violence that is spreading to the settled districts of the Northwest Frontier Province.  He said that the militants used the Red Mosque incident as a catalyst to increase violence.  In addition to violence, there was also growing Talibanization in the Province.  Sherpao used the example of Swat, a settled district where the situation was deteriorating sharply.  CD shops in Swat had been bombed, notices had been given to barbers to not shave men's beards, warnings had been issued to schools to close down.  He cited a very prominent 50-year old boys' school that had just shut down in Swat under pressure from extremists.  8. (C) Sherpao stressed that the Taliban influence has engulfed all of the Northwest Frontier and is evident even in the central districts of the province.  In his opinion, the unfortunate fact that the provincial government of the NWFP was controlled by the religious parties alliance has allowed the Talibanization to spread further.  The Government of Pakistan has asked the Provincial government to stop the extremist pressure, but the provincial government has been unable or unwilling to  respond effectively.  Sherpao described widespread harassment of local and international NGOs, schools, barbers, CD shops, journalists, and politicians.  9. (C) Minister Sherpao said that in his briefing to the National Security Council, serious decisions were taken to help curb Talibanization.  --All political parties should unite against terrorism and extremism at the district level.  The political parties should mobilize public participation in the active condemnation and then the public will be able to put pressure on the local Taliban.  --Establish small jirgas under local political authorities that seek religious edicts against terrorism.  The jirgas would then do outreach to local populations with these edicts.  --Coordinate intelligence agencies' activities with provincial governments.  --Provide provincial governments with lists of madrassas preaching extremism in each local area so that pressure can be applied at a local level.  --Increase the police force by 50,000, with half of the budget coming from the federal government.  --Provide more equipment and training to the Frontier police, Frontier Constabulary, and Frontier Corps.  SECURITY FORCES: INCREASING STRENGTH & CAPACITY --------------------------------------------- ---  10. (C) Minister Sherpao said that the increased military presence in the FATA has significantly decreased cross-border movement.  He said that the security forces will continue to focus of militant ring leaders until they  are eliminated. However, the Northwest Frontier Province does not have enough police forces to maintain law and order.  Due to the shortfall, the army has moved in to give them support. Sherpao said that as soon as the security forces increase in strength and capacity, the Army will be able to leave.  11. (C) Minister Sherpao outlined the details for increasing the strength of the various paramilitary and police forces under the control of the Ministry of Interior.  By January 2008, he forecasted a marked increase in the recruitment and training of Frontier Corps, Frontier Constabulary, and local police.  An additional 2,000 Frontier Constabulary forces would be positioned on the border between the Tribal Areas and the settled districts to prevent militant incursions. The plan remains to squeeze the militants into a bounded area and then either apprehend or eliminate them.  12. (C) Sherpao reiterated the importance of the paramlitary  ISLAMABAD 00004107  003.2 OF 004   forces, such as the Frontier Corps, because their strength came from their position as Pashtuns.  The Army was viewed as outsiders, but the Frontier Corps was fighting militants amongst their own people.  Thus they were more effective and could gain the support of local tribes.  PAK-AFGHAN JIRGA: A STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION --------------------------------------------- ---  13.(C) Minister Sherpao and the Deputy Secretary discussed the recent Peace Jirga between Pakistan and Afghanistan. The main idea was to increase people to people contact between Pakistanis and Afghans.  The jirga covered counterterrorism, extremism, narcotics, cross-border movements, and trade.  Sherpao said that initially the Pakistanis were apprehensive that the jirga would become a forum for the Afghans to blame Pakistan for all their problems.  Also Sherpao cited the initial setbacks before the jirga, including the decisions of the religious parties not to participate and the last minute pull-out of the elders from North and South Waziristan due to militant pressure.  14. (C) The surprisingly successful jirga left the Pakistani delegation with hope and Sherpao said that he was very proud to lead the delegation.  President Musharraf's participation on the last day of the jirga increased the goodwill and  changed the whole atmosphere of the jirga. Also since the conclusion, there have been no critical Afghan public statements about the Pakistan, which Sherpao said was a positive result of the jirga.  Both Pakistan and Afghanistan are very focused on fighting terrorism and extremism and the jirga is a positive step in this fight. Sherpao noted that even the religious parties were now regretting their non-participation.  15. (C) Sherpao said the next step will be holding a smaller 50-person jirga, with 25 representatives from each country to focus on the smaller details and implementation. The focused jirga will reach out to \"reconcilable Taliban\". Sherpao will be meeting with his Afghan counterpart to discuss the participants of the smaller implementation jirga to make sure they are compatible and also that they command respect and can enforce the agreements.  Sherpao noted that even the feedback from the Taliban has not been bad, with Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's people saying that if certain conditions were met they would be willing to talk to the jirga.  16. (C) Sherpao noted that this was just a beginning in the fight against militants.  For terrorists the GOP would continue to use force, but to fight extremism they would use long-term solutions and try to talk with the involved parties.  He saw sub-jirgas at the border as one solution that would have local tribes enforcing border security agreements.  Sherpao also mentioned the importance of the jirga's focus of narcotics because so much of terrorist funding was coming from drug barons.  BORDER SECURITY MANAGEMENT ---------------------------  17. (C) The Secretary of the Interior Ch. Zafar Warraich briefed the meeting on Pakistan's efforts to secure its 2,400 km border with Afghanistan.  He described the more than 1,000 border checkposts in Balochistan and the NWFP.  Additionally the Pakistanis were starting to use biometrics to identify people crossing the border.  Warraich cited that Afghanistan only had 100 checkposts.  The Pakistanis would like Afghanistan to increase its checkposts and also was willing to share their biometric technology and data to better secure both sides of the border.  Border crossings, such as the one at Chaman, were now using biometric cards to retain data about frequent crossers, including those people from tribes that were on both sides of the border.  Three more biometric checkposts were going to be installed in Baluchistan and one in the Northwest Frontier at Torkham.  18. (C) Warraich cited the constant Afghan Government complaints about Afghan Taliban seeking medical attention in Balochistan.  In response, the Pakistani Government used the  ISLAMABAD 00004107  004.2 OF 004   biometric data to scan hospitals and they subsequently caught about 500 militants.  Of these, 300 have been turned over to Afghanistan, and about 180 are still being interrogated. Pakistan also addressed the complaints by starting to close the refugee camps where many Afghan Taliban seek sanctuary. Secretary Warraich thanked the United States for its  SIPDIS assistance in building a Levy training center and also in increasing the Frontier Corps.  These increased security forces would be effective in manning the border and stopping cross-border incursions.  19. (C) Both Sherpao and Warraich ended by stressing the importance of U.S. assistance for the Tribal Areas, legislation for Reconstruction Opportunity Zones, and resources for the Frontier Corps.  They said the long-term solution for extremism was to provide these tribesmen employment, education, and economic activity.  20. (U) The Deputy Secretary's staff has cleared this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/24/2007 15:26", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 ISLAMABAD 004108  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2017 TAGS: PREL, ECON, EAID, ENRG, TSPL, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: U.S.-PAKISTAN STRATEGIC DIALOGUE, SEPTEMBER 12  ISLAMABAD 00004108  001.2 OF 006   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson for reason 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (SBU) The second session of the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue took place in Islamabad on September 12, 2007. Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte and Foreign Secretary Khan chaired the meeting and agreed that future sessions of the Dialogue should occur every six months.  The Pakistanis also requested that agriculture be added as another \"track\" in the Dialogue.  Post will provide a final list of agreed activities after conferral with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  ------------------ Opening Statements ------------------  2. (SBU) Deputy Secretary John Negroponte and Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan chaired the second meeting of the U.S.-  SIPDIS Pakistan Strategic Dialogue launched by Presidents Bush and Musharraf in Islamabad in March 2006.  The two Presidents committed both countries to enhance cooperation in the areas of economic growth and prosperity, energy, peace and security, social sector development, science and technology, democracy and non-proliferation.  The Strategic Dialogue is an expression of the close cooperation between our two countries on issues vital to Pakistan's continued economic growth and work on poverty alleviation.  3. (SBU) Foreign Secretary Khan noted the great importance that Pakistan attaches to the Strategic Dialogue and noted that it represents a new dimension in the bilateral relationship.  Noting the sixth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, he emphasized the importance of a relationship that is not based on one element but is strong and broadly address challenges whenever necessary.  Deputy Secretary Negroponte noted the importance the U.S. places on our relationship with Pakistan and specifically outlined our cooperation in the war on terror, the U.S. package for foreign assistance to Pakistan, the proposal to establish Reconstruction Opportunity Zones and the $750 million pledge for development of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas over the next five years.  4. (SBU) Break-out sessions of the Strategic Dialogue focused on the four tracks: education, economic growth, energy and science and technology.  --------------------------------------------- ------------ Education: Cooperation, Teacher Education, Sustainability --------------------------------------------- ------------  5. (SBU) Jahangir Bashar, Federal Secretary of Education, and Mark Ward, Senior Deputy Assistant Administrator (DAA), USAID, chaired the Education sub-group session with Dr. Sohail Naqvi, Executive Director, Higher Education Commission, leading the discussion on higher education.  6. (SBU) In his introductory remarks, Secretary Bashar presented education statistics that call for continued bilateral support to address a dropout rate of 31 percent, literacy rate of 54 percent, and a large disparity in female access to education.  In laying out how the Ministry is responding to these poor indicators, he reported that the new education policy had been drafted and was to be submitted to the Cabinet for their approval on September 15.  Bashar announced that the new national curriculum had been approved but the distribution of textbooks would be delayed by one year. He also announced that the Ministry had carried out a National Education Census that will provide a better statistical basis for policy and planning.  Bashar also highlighted several areas for improvement, such as better progress in addressing Universal Primary Education commitments; advancement in the field of vocational technical training; capacity development for education managers; and the need for development of accreditation systems and standards to improve the quality of teachers.  Bashar also welcomed the expansion of the Fulbright program.  7. (SBU) Dr. Naqvi reported that several of the ideas originally discussed with the U.S. in 2002 had become realities, including the USAID-supported Need/Merit based scholarship program. Naqvi pointed out that not only does the USAID program provide 1,000 scholarships, but it also has helped to establish offices of financial aid and procedures for processing scholarship awards.  Dr. Naqvi outlined a number of new initiatives and asked the U.S. to consider  ISLAMABAD 00004108  002.2 OF 006   supporting them.  USAID agreed to initiate immediate consultations with the Higher Education Commission for the development of USAID's next five-year strategy on higher education.  8. (SBU) USAID Senior DAA Ward reiterated Bashar's earlier comments about the importance of improving teacher education and agreed that this was an area for continued joint cooperation.  Ward asked whether the Ministry felt it was being consulted on the development and monitoring of U.S.-funded programs in education.  Bashar indicated that coordination had in fact improved.  USAID and the Ministry agreed to meet regularly, especially in the development and design of new programs.  9. (SBU) Regarding the geographical coverage of U.S. support, Bashar requested that the U.S. consider providing support to the Northwest Frontier Province, Azad Jammu and Kashmir, and Punjab in the national programs.  Ward responded that while Punjab already receives heavy support, the U.S. could consider supporting these regions in future programs.  Ward cautioned the Ministry that if the geographical coverage was too broad, funding might be too stretched to make a real difference.  10. (SBU) Both sides agreed that teacher education, access, improved literacy, and reduced drop-out rates were important and that USAID's new program will address these areas.  They also agreed to continue joint monitoring and close cooperation on all education support in Pakistan and to review the geographical expansion of education support.  The Ministry appreciated the coordination efforts in the design of USAID's new Links to Learning program, the $90 million flagship program in education, and noted that proposals submitted to the U.S. at the last Education Dialogue (November 2006) had been incorporated into the new program. Bashar closed the session by commenting on the need for development programs to use local institutions such as school management committees to ensure the sustainability of joint efforts in education.  --------------------------------------------- ------------- Economic Growth: Reconstruction Opportunity Zones,   Tribal Areas, Intellectual Property and Money Laundering --------------------------------------------- -------------  11. (SBU) The Economic Growth and Development breakout session, chaired by Economic, Energy and Business Affairs Deputy Assistant Secretary (EEB DAS) Chris Moore and Commerce Ministry Secretary Asif Akhtar Syed, covered Reconstruction Opportunity Zones, Tribal Areas development, intellectual property rights protection and the upcoming out-of-cycle review, and touched on Pakistan's recently issued anti-money laundering ordinance.  The U.S. acknowledged issuance of the anti-money laundering ordinance as a positive development and added that we are still reviewing its provisions.  Other Government of Pakistan participants included representatives from the Prime Minister's office, Board of Investment, Ministry of Health, Intellectual Property Organization, Ministry of Finance, Central Board of Revenue, Federal Investigative Agency, and Economic Affairs Division.  The Embassy's Economic and Commercial Affairs Counselor and Economic Specialist also participated.  12. (SBU) On the Reconstruction Opportunity Zones, Moore explained that the legislation is nearly ready to be introduced in Congress and included many of Pakistan's recommendations.  He also highlighted that most trade preference legislation requires years to develop and must take into account U.S. textile and apparel sector sensitivities.  He asked for Pakistani Government and private sector support going forward and cited the Karachi Chamber of Commerce U.S. trip as a useful model.  Moore also urged Pakistan to start thinking about implementation (i.e., location, incentives, training, and ensuring worker rights protections).  Secretary Shah agreed that the Pakistani Government would work on Reconstruction Opportunity Zone implementation in advance of the October 23 Economic Dialogue in Washington.  13. (SBU) Shah and his team made another push for inclusion of tariff lines 347 and 348 (men's and women's cotton trousers), arguing that Pakistan's small U.S. market share in these categories would not harm U.S. producers and that the job creation benefits would outweigh the costs.  Moore pointed out that the legislation is crafted to pass Congress  ISLAMABAD 00004108  003.2 OF 006   quickly; inclusion of 347 and 348 could doom that effort. The Opportunity Zone rules of origin provisions (single transformation) and program duration (15 years) are very generous.  Shah also pushed for inclusion of the entire province of Balochistan, arguing that it is less developed than Northwest Frontier Province.  Moore responded that inclusion of Gwadar and the area bordering Karachi would detract from the goal of developing the border areas.  Shah suggested a cap on the number of Reconstruction Opportunity Zones near Gwadar.  14. (SBU) Tauqir Ahmed, Additional Finance Secretary, briefed on Pakistani plans in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, stressing the need for infrastructure.  While the Tribal Areas Secretariat is up and running and small projects are already under way, absorptive capacity will be a problem.  He also highlighted the need for additional funding.  Moore noted the strong cooperation between the U.S. and Pakistan on Tribal Areas development and the growing success of U.S. efforts to attract additional donors to contribute to Tribal Areas development.  15. (SBU) On intellectual property rights protection, Moore urged Pakistan to enact TRIPS-consistent data protection legislation quickly.  Shah and his TRIPS expert explained that the Ministry of Law had revised the law so that it was no longer TRIPS consistent, so they had to go back to the drawing board.  He hoped that a meeting would be held next week to discuss the final draft with stakeholders and then finalize the law.  He hinted that it would be issued as an ordinance (law signed by the President, without legislative approval, but needing renewal every 90 days).  Moore asked if we could see the legislation, noting that the lack of transparency raises serious concerns in both U.S. Government and industry circles.  Shah promised to explore sharing the draft.  Moore commented that sharing the draft could be an important milestone for the upcoming 301 out-of-cycle review.  He also shared the Federal Register notice for comments for the 301 out-of-cycle review and urged Shah and his team to submit a robust report in advance of the October 15 deadline.  16. (SBU) The U.S. and Pakistan agreed that the October 23 Economic Dialogue would include further discussion on the bilateral investment treaty as well as on global and regional issues including Afghan transit trade, Reconstruction Opportunity Zones, Tribal Areas implementation, and intellectual property rights protection.  Pakistani Government interagency bilateral investment treaty discussions are still under way; Shah hoped to have a position to share in advance of the October 23 meeting. (Comment: The holdup here appears to be the Attorney General's preoccupation with political cases before the Supreme Court.  End Comment.)  --------------------------------------------- Energy: U.S. Private Sector Investment Sought ---------------------------------------------  17. (SBU) Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Energy Katharine Fredriksen and Mr. Mukhtar Ahmed, Special Advisor to the Prime Minister on Energy, co-chaired discussions to further strengthen bilateral cooperation in the energy field and build on recent accomplishments. The Pakistanis emphasized their need to formulate comprehensive plans to address Pakistan's energy shortfall and their desire to attract U.S. investors in all energy sectors.  They also stressed the need for more progress in the Strategic Dialogue energy sessions to help develop programs for fulfilling Pakistan's energy needs.  18. (SBU) Noting the February 2007 videoconference on coal and fossil fuels, Ahmed explained that coal is a shared responsibility under the constitution of Pakistan. The federal government sets the policy guidelines but the provinces control the deposits that are located within their borders.  Ahmed noted the large coal reserves in the Sindh province and requested U.S. assistance in developing a coordinated plan for Pakistan that clearly delineates the regulatory, legal, and policy issues between the federal and provincial governments, as well as the need for institutional strengthening of all agencies responsible for coal.  PDAS Fredriksen noted that the U.S. has a similar division of authorities between the federal government and the state governments and we could share our expertise on this issue.  19. (C) Ahmed requested U.S. assistance in making progress on  ISLAMABAD 00004108  004.2 OF 006   the development of the Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India pipeline.  He noted that the Government of Pakistan has been talking with Turkmenistan but is concerned that discussions are not advancing.  Ahmed requested U.S. assistance in \"neutralizing outside influences\" such as China and Russia who are \"constraining Turkmenistan from talking freely to Pakistan.\"  PDAS Fredriksen noted that the U.S. Government would like to be helpful on this issue and would carry this message forward.  20. (SBU) Renewable energy policy in Pakistan is governed by two agencies: the Alternative Energy Development Board, which is responsible for developing policy and projects; and the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority, which serves as the regulating authority.  Ahmed requested U.S. assistance for capacity building in both institutions to deal with renewable energy issues.  21. (SBU) PDAS Fredriksen highlighted the June 2007 release of wind and solar energy resource maps for Pakistan.  These assessments were completed by the U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory and USAID's South Asia Regional Initiative for Energy.  The resource maps indicate a 2.6 Million MW PV-electric capacity potential and a 346,000 MW total wind electric energy production potential. Sindh Province has the most promising near-term development potential, with wind electric potential of 87,000 MW.  Three energy-related U.S. Trade and Development Agency grants for feasibility studies totaling $1.4 million dollars were signed in August 2007 and work is ongoing on waste-to-energy, coal mining and power generation, and wind power.  Interagency working group meetings on fossil energy, energy efficiency, and renewable energy will continue to address other opportunities for technical collaboration via digital video conference.  22. (SBU) PDAS Fredriksen noted that although the Department of Energy is the focal point in the Strategic Dialogue's Energy sub-group, other U.S. Government agencies (such as Interior, U.S. Trade and Development Agency, USAID, and State) will also need to provide input for these policy assistance requests.  Areas of potential collaboration include resource assessments, technology information exchange, technical and regulatory assistance, and energy efficiency planning.  The participants discussed holding the next session of the Energy Dialogue in the U.S. within the next few months to further discuss details for the proposed interactions.  The Department of Energy will consider these proposed agenda items and other ideas as the possible basis for a Memorandum of Understanding with Pakistan.  --------------------------------------------- ----- Science and Technology: Human Resource Development --------------------------------------------- -----  23. (SBU) The Science and Technology breakout session was chaired by E. Bruce Howard, Director, Office of Science and Technology Cooperation in the Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs (OES), and Professor Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman, Advisor to the Prime Minister on Science and Technology.  Also participating in the meeting were Parvez Butt, Secretary, Ministry of Science and Technology, and Dr. S.T.K. Naim, Consultant to the OIC Standing Committee on Scientific and Technological Cooperation (COMSTECH).  Discussions focused on the current status of the 2005 U.S.-Pakistan Science and Technology agreement and the projects funded under this agreement; Pakistan's wish for an increasing the funding arrangement and the number of Fulbright scholars from Pakistan; and the establishment of a university of industrial biotechnology.  24. (SBU) In 2005, USAID began funding a Science and Technology program under which the U.S. contributes approximately $2 million per year and Pakistan contributes approximately $3 million per year.  So far, 39 projects have been funded.  Atta-ur-Rahman stated Pakistan was willing to increase funding to $40 million if the U.S. made a similar commitment.  Howard replied that funding is always difficult, but there may be a way to provide in-kind contributions, such as the salaries of U.S. scientists working on the joint projects.  25. (SBU) Secretary Butt expressed concern that these projects, along with the 16 working groups established after February 2007 meeting of the High-Level Joint Committee on Science and Technology, would focus too much on disparate projects of interest to individual scientists, and not enough  ISLAMABAD 00004108  005.2 OF 006   on broader issues, such as institutional capacity building. The Pakistan side noted how several countries had provided linkages to their universities or a consortium of universities to establish institutes in Pakistan offering joint degree programs.  They requested U.S. help in establishing an institute for industrial biotechnology. Atta-ur-Rahman pointed out that Pakistan had the money for the building and equipment, but required U.S. expertise in curriculum development and teaching.  Howard agreed this would be a worthwhile project and promised to work on finding university linkages.  26. (SBU) Atta-ur-Rahman requested an increase in the number of Fulbright scholarships offered to Pakistan.  He promised to increase funding from Pakistan in order to make this work.  Howard pointed out that Pakistan has the world's largest Fulbright program and expanding it further would be sensitive at a time when some countries are limited in the number of scholarships they receive.  27. (SBU) In the end, most of the discussion boiled down to an increase in funding.  Atta-ur-Rahman has additional funds and is willing to spend them, but only if there is reciprocity from the U.S. side.  He suggested taking a portion of the $200 million in annual budget support funds that USAID transfers to Pakistan and earmarking it for science and technology programs.  He stated this money would be considered matching support from the U.S. side, which would allow him to release additional funds of his own.  ----------------------- Closing session: Energy -----------------------  28. (SBU) After short statements from Secretary Khan and Deputy Secretary Negroponte, the leads from each of the four breakout groups reported the results of their sessions.  On energy, Special Advisor to the Prime Minister Muktar Ahmed explained that his group had taken stock of progress to date in the Energy Dialogue with two video conferences on coal/fossil fuel and alternative energy sources already held.  On coal/fossil fuels, Ahmed noted Pakistan's growing needs for private sector investment and technical assistance in the energy sector to bridge the growing gap between Pakistan's energy needs and actual production.  He also commented on the need to work on energy efficiency and conservation and the importance of other U.S. government agencies' involvement. Ahmed also recognized the importance of a good investment climate to attract private sector.  Department of Energy PDAS Fredriksen commented that the group had put together a solid agenda for the bilateral meeting later this fall in Washington and that the U.S. and Pakistan will sign a Memorandum of Understanding on energy cooperation.  --------------------------------------------- - Closing Session: Economic Growth & Development --------------------------------------------- -  29. (SBU) EEB DAS Chris Moore described the Economic Growth and Development sub-group's efforts to focus on a broader strategic framework to encompass regional and global economic issues in advance of the October 23 Economic Dialogue in Washington.  Within this framework, Moore explained that the Reconstruction Opportunity Zone legislation would be sent soon to the U.S. Congress.  He took note of Pakistani interest to include categories 347 and 348 and the entire province of Balochistan in the legislation, but noted the extensive consultation process (including with the Government of Pakistan) needed to develop legislation that is both as broad as possible and can pass Congress quickly.  After advocating again for inclusion of categories 347 and 348 and Balochistan, Commerce Secretary Shah emphasized that the Government of Pakistan is pleased with the legislation and strongly supports it.  The U.S. expects to work with the Pakistani Government and private sector to build strong, broad support.  On intellectual property rights, Moore noted the importance of finalizing and enacting TRIPS-consistent data protection legislation as soon as possible and asked that the Pakistani Government share its draft.  On the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, the U.S. and Pakistan are working to attract additional donors.  The U.S. is working with its G8 partners to follow up on commitments made at the 2007 Summit.  Shah highlighted the need for infrastructure.  On the anti-money laundering legislation, the U.S. is reviewing the September 8 ordinance.  Shah noted that the bilateral investment treaty will be on the agenda  ISLAMABAD 00004108  006.2 OF 006   for the Economic Dialogue.  --------------------------------------- Closing Session: Science and Technology ---------------------------------------  30. (SBU) OES Science and Technology Office Director Howard outlined progress to date under the 2005 Science and Technology agreement.  The U.S. and Pakistan will review 115 project proposals submitted for funding in the final year of the agreement.  Both the U.S. and Pakistan are interested in continuing this agreement; Pakistan has funding, but the U.S. still needs to identify matching funds.  Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman, Advisor to the Prime Minister on Science and Technology, highlighted that Pakistan wants to upgrade its nine research institutes in partnership with individual foreign countries. He hopes to attract a U.S. university consortium and is seeking $20 million in funding.  -------------------------- Closing Session: Education --------------------------  31. (SBU) Education Secretary Bashar emphasized the need for U.S. support on education to achieve regional peace and security.  He announced that both sides agreed on stronger integration of education sector planning in the context of meeting Pakistan's development objectives.  The two sides agreed to: meet regularly on program issues; continue the focus on teacher education; consider extending the basic education program to other areas, including Northwest Frontier Province, Azad Jammu and Kashmir, and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas; to involve school management committees, parent-teacher associations, and district education offices to ensure program sustainability; and to consult on USAID's next five-year strategy for higher education.  32. (SBU) USAID Senior DAA Ward added that \"teachers are the unsung heroes in Pakistan\" and that USAID plans to continue its focus on teacher education during the next program.  He paired the cooperation on the education programs, highlighting the success of the school management association committees and other local organizations.  --------------------------------------------- ---- Wrap Up: Good discussions; meet again in 6 months --------------------------------------------- ----  33. (SBU) In brief closing statements, both Khan and Negroponte expressed pleasure with the quality of the discussions and promised to follow up, keeping the respective Embassies informed.  In response to Khan's question about the timing of the next meeting, Negroponte and Khan agreed to meet in six months in Washington.  34. (U) The Deputy Secretary's staff has cleared this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4094", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2007 2:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004148  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/26/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: GOP PREPARES FOR A SUPREME COURT VERDICT ON MUSHARRAF'S RE-ELECTION  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4094       B. ISLAMABAD 4024  Classified By: A/DCM Candace Putnam, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Pakistan's Supreme Court continues to hear arguments on the bundle of pending cases challenging President Musharraf's eligibility to run for re-election.  We expect a verdict by the end of the week, and the government remains confident of a pro-Musharraf vote.  Musharraf has signed his nomination papers, which will be submitted to the Election Commission September 27, along with the nominations of potentially 88 other challengers.  Anticipating chaos at the Election Commission and a planned nationwide lawyers' demonstration, the GOP has increased road blocks and security checks around Islamabad.   The disunited opposition parties are still threatening to resign from the National and Provincial Assemblies ahead of the presidential vote.  While a walkout could weaken Musharraf's credibility, we still expect Musharraf to win the required simple majority vote. Talks are underway between Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and Musharraf's representatives on draft legislation to grant an amnesty for Benazir Bhutto.   Reportedly, the alleged sticking point of the Musharraf-Bhutto deal is which will come first -- amnesty for Bhutto or Musharraf's re-election with the PPP's supporting presence.  End Summary.  -------------------------------- Supreme Court Hearings Continue --------------------------------  2. (U) Pakistan's Supreme Court continues to hear arguments in the bundled cases challenging Musharraf's eligibility to run for re-election.  The joined case of 10 separate plaintiffs' motions has taken longer than the Court itself originally predicted.  Four of these motions have been dismissed directly from the bench: one petitioner did not show; two represented themselves without legal counsel; all four forwarded \"creative\" arguments on why Musharraf would not be able to stand for re-election.  Next comes a friends of the court brief, and court watchers expect the hearing to conclude on September 27 or September 28.  The government continues to be confident of a pro-Musharraf verdict; most political analysts here agree.  ------------------------------ Presidential Nominations Filed ------------------------------  3. (C) President Musharraf has signed his nomination papers, which should be submitted tomorrow.  At least 88 candidates have obtained nomination papers, including civil servants, university professors, medical doctors and retired judges. One interesting candidate who has filed his papers is former Supreme Court Justice Wajihuddin Ahmed.  Ahmed, who was forced to retire in 2000 when he refused to accept Musharraf's provisional constitutional order, is supported by the Supreme Court Bar Association and other legal fraternities.  Also on September 26, PPP in-country leader Makhdoom Amin Fahim announced he will be a candidate, if the Supreme Court disqualifies Musharraf.  ----------------------------- Musharraf-Bhutto Negotiations -----------------------------  4. (C)  Pakistan Muslim League Secretary General Mushahid Hussain told Ambassador September 25 that he and PML President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain were engaged in direct talks with the PPP's Fahim.  They were negotiating the text of legislation to grant Bhutto (and other politicians) an amnesty over pending corruption charges.  In exchange, Musharraf wants to ensure that the PPP does not resign from the assemblies ahead of the presidential vote.   The sticking point appears to be which will come first -- parliamentary approval of amnesty legislation or Musharraf's re-election with the PPP present but voting to abstain in the assemblies.  Bhutto resumed her tactic of negotiating through the media; local newspapers reported her latest list of conditions: amnesty, Musharraf's resignation as Chief of Army Staff, and  ISLAMABAD 00004148  002 OF 002   assurances the two-term limit on prime ministers would be lifted.  -------------------- Disunited Opposition --------------------  5. (C)  Meanwhile, the rest of the opposition remains disunited.  The All Parties Democratic Movement (APDM) is threatening that its members will resign from the National and Provincial Assemblies if the Court and Election Commission rule in favor of Musharraf.  But at a meeting of the MMA religious block September 25, JUI-F leader Fazlur Rehman would not commit to a walkout, and the APDM has been unable to agree on a united opposition candidate to challenge Musharraf.  Many of Nawaz Sharif's party leaders have gone underground or headed to Mecca to avoid arrest by the government. JUI-F General Secretary Ghafoor Haideri told poloff September 25 that Rehman met with Nawaz this week in Saudi Arabia.  Reportedly, Nawaz was \"despondent and depressed\" and did not appear to be planning a return.  The Pakistan Lawyers Association plans nationwide protest demonstrations on September 27.  6. (C)  Anticipating chaos from the lawyers' demonstration and the prospect of potentially 88 candidates filing their papers at the Election Commission on the same day, the GOP plans to continue stringent security checkpoints around the Supreme Court and Election Commission. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2007 9:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004158  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF PLACES LOYALISTS IN KEY ARMY SLOTS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson for Reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1. (U) Summary.  On September 21, President Musharraf announced the promotion of six major generals - all Musharraf loyalists - to the rank of lieutenant generals.  The most notable appointment was that of Major General Nadeem Taj to Director General Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) to succeed current DG Lt Gen Kayani.  Musharraf is consolidating his power base within the Army and attempting to secure his control over that critical institution as he contemplates removing his uniform and assuming a civilian presidency.  We expect decisions on the new Vice Chief of Army Staff and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs before the October 6 presidential election.  End Summary.  TAJ TAKES OVER ISI  2. (C) On September 21, President Musharraf appointed six major generals to the rank of lieutenant general. The most significant of these appointments was that of newly promoted Lt Gen Nadeem Taj to Director General ISI, succeeding Lt Gen Ashfaq Pervez Kayani.  (Kayani is rumored to be under consideration for the post of Vice Chief of Army Staff where he would succeed retiring General Ahsan Saleem Hyat.)  3. (C) Taj is former head of Military Intelligence and a close Musharraf loyalist with historic ties to the President.  He served as Musharraf's personal secretary when he was Chief of Army Staff and military secretary when Musharraf became President.  In fact, he was on the plane with Musharraf in 1999 when PM Nawaz Sharif attempted to prevent the landing; this event triggered Musharraf's 1999 coup. Additionally, Taj was nearly killed during the two attempts on Musharraf's life in December 2003.  Taj's wife is also related to Musharraf.  NEW COUNTERNARCOTICS CHIEF  4. (C) The next most significant appointment was that of Major General Shujaat Zamir Dar to Director General of the Anti-Narcotics Force (ANF). Dar served as Inspector General Frontier Corps Balochistan where he gained a reputation as a proactive hardliner in combating counterinsurgency.  Dar also reportedly oversaw the development of the Frontier Corps Rapid Interdiction Force.  (Note: Dar's ANF predecessor, General Khalid Jaffrey, took a passive and often obstructive role in counternarcotics cooperation; Post hopes that Dar will be a more active and cooperative partner, though he also has a reputation for being arrogant and demanding.  Dar has made an early move towards engagement by agreeing to participate in a DEA-sponsored trip to the U.S. to attend the International Association of Chiefs of Police conference (Oct. 13-17) and participate in follow-on senior DEA consultations, even though this means he will begin travel the day after he assumes office.  END NOTE)  5. (C) Comment.  Musharraf has announced that he will resign as Chief of Army Staff before he takes the oath of office for another term as President (probably on November 15).  The Supreme Court currently is hearing challenges to his eligibility to seek re-election and could demand he remove the uniform in order to be a candidate (September 29).   When he takes off his uniform, Musharraf will lose control over Army promotions, thus significantly reducing his status as a powerbroker within the institution.  By filling the most critical Army slots with loyalists now, he is seeking to ensure that, even as a civilian, he will maintain the Army's indispensable support for his leadership.  That support seems firmly in place at the moment; however, Pakistan's history is replete with examples of other presidents who mistakenly thought they had secured the critical support of the Chief of Army Staff.  We expect Musharraf to announce his choices for Vice Chief of Army Staff (who will automatically become Chief once Musharraf resigns) and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs before the October 6 presidential election. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4094|07ISLAMABAD4148", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/27/2007 11:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004167  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTION COMMISSION CLOSES NOMINATION LIST  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4094      B. ISLAMABAD 4148  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) accepted nominations from forty-one presidential candidates, including President Pervez Musharraf and Pakistan People's Party (PPP) in-country leader Amin Fahim, by the noon September 27 filing deadline.  These 41 included candidates from Islamabad (13), Punjab (11), Sindh (14), and the Northwest Frontier Province (3).  2. (U) The Election Commission will vet the candidates by September 29 and then oversee the October 6 voting process in the National and Provincial Assemblies.  The Supreme Court is expected to hear final arguments September 28 in the bundle of cases challenging Musharraf's eligibility to be a candidate for re-election.  3. (U) Opposition parties continue to debate whether to resign from the National and Provincial Assemblies in advance of the presidential vote.  Members of Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-N party and some members of the MMA religious block parties are already tendering their resignations to party leaders throughout the country.  Extensive road closures and security checkpoints in Islamabad prevented any significant demonstrations today.  4. (C) Comment.  At an iftar hosted by outgoing ISI Chief Kayani September 26, Musharraf defended his role in bringing real democracy to Pakistan.  But the government remains focused on whether the PPP will resign from the National Assembly and weaken Musharraf's credibility in winning re-election.  Opposition parties have threatened to resign in the past without following through, and it is difficult to see how the PPP can walk out when Fahim is an alternative candidate.  All eyes will be on tomorrow's expected Supreme Court decision on Musharraf's eligibility.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4167", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/28/2007 12:48", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004204  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT FREES POLITICAL DETAINEES, OPENS ROADS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4167  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) On September 27, Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry ordered the release of political party activists arrested over the September 22-23 weekend and the lifting of roadblocks throughout and surrounding the capital.  2. (U) At least 100 opposition political party leaders and activists, including PML-Nawaz in-country leader Javed Hashmi, had been detained.  According to the GOP, their arrest was necessary \"for the maintenance of public order.\" (Note: Embassy and the EU, separately, issued September 24 statements protesting the detention of opposition party members.  End note.)  3. (U) Although some opposition had planned protests at the Supreme Court (hearing closing remarks in the Musharraf case) and the Election Commission (receiving presidential nomination papers), they were only able to muster about 50 MMA members at any point during this past two-week period. The GOP made it difficult to demonstrate by establishing road blocks September 27 and security checks around government buildings, stopping all traffic from entering the capital.  4. (C) Comment: The Supreme Court's action is another sign of the judiciary's growing confidence in defending civil society.  Ahead of what is expected to be a pro-Musharraf verdict, the Court was also burnishing its credentials with lawyers and opposition figures.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4024|07ISLAMABAD4167", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/28/2007 13:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004206  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: SUPREME COURT RULES FOR MUSHARRAF  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4024      B. ISLAMABAD 4167  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: In a complex decision, Pakistan's Supreme Court ruled September 28 six to three to dismiss the petitions challenging Musharraf's right to run for re-election while concurrently holding the offices of President and Chief of Army Staff.  However, the decision was based on procedural grounds which could open the door for additional legal challenges after the Election Commission rules September 29 on the eligibility of Musharraf to be a candidate.  Since the Court did not technically rule on the uniform issue, Musharraf could theoretically decide to continue as Chief of Army Staff despite his public pledges to resign from the Army.  PM Aziz issued a statement saying the ruling cleared the way for Musharraf's re-election; opposition leaders condemned the decision.  The decision could be appealed as early as Monday.  End summary.  2. (C) On September 29, a nine-member bench of the Supreme Court ruled 6-3 to dismiss pending petitions that challenged Musharraf's ability to run for re-election while concurrently holding the offices of President and Chief of Army Staff. The Court dismissed the cases on procedural grounds that it can only hear matters of fundamental rights, and these petitioners did not bring a case based on their fundamental rights.  Both the majority and minority cited this same issue without elaborating on their legal reasoning.  Typically, the Court issues the full legal opinions on a case weeks after the decision is announced.  3. (C) Legal experts are interpreting this ruling as sending the issue back to the Election Commission, which amended its election rules on September 16 to allow civil servants (e.g., Musharraf) to contest the presidential election (Ref A). Assuming the Election Commission declares Musharraf as an eligible candidate on September 29, the government's ruling coalition has enough votes in the National and Provincial Assemblies for the simple majority required for Musharraf to be elected on October 6 (Ref B).  4. (C) Speaking from an emergency cabinet session, Prime Minister Aziz lauded the decision, saying that it cleared up any doubts about Musharraf's eligibility.  Opposing counsel erupted in protest upon hearing the decision, and opposition parties were quick to call into question the credibility of the Court.  However, as the opposition analyzes the decision, it may revise its views.  It appears that the decision allows approved candidates to have a legal basis for future challenges to Musharraf's eligibility.  5. (C) Comment: Legally, the decision allows Musharraf to run for re-election on October 6 in uniform.  Since the Court did not technically rule on the uniform issue, Musharraf could theoretically decide to continue as Chief of Army Staff despite his public pledges to resign from the Army.  6. (C) The Supreme Court has ruled on a technicality, which gives Musharraf a victory while keeping his legal status in question.  The Court avoided a negative verdict, which could have provoked a constitutional crisis and an extreme government reaction.  We expect the challengers to be back in court as early as Monday after the Election Commission rules that Musharraf is eligible to be a candidate.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE114799", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/29/2007 9:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ISLAMABAD 004208  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/TPP, EB/IFD/OIA, AND EB/IFD/OMA USAID FOR ANE MWARD TREASURY FOR OSSA COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA MANILA PASS USED AT ADB STATE PASS USTR FOR RGERBER, DHARTWICK DOHA FOR PEASLEE  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS:  ETRD, ECON, EINV, PK SUBJECT:   PAKISTAN'S TEXTILE EXPORTS DROP; COMPETITIVENESS AN ISSUE  REF:  STATE 114799  Summary - - - - - - -  1.  (SBU)  Textiles and apparel account for 38 percent of Pakistan's total industrial production but almost 2/3 of exports. Despite $6 billion in investment in the textile sector in the last six years, textile exports growth slowed down in FY07 to just 5.2 percent versus last year's 16.8 percent. Textile exporters attribute the slowdown to high utility charges, low labor productivity, competition from India, China, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka and high cotton prices. While Pakistan provides various tax breaks and duty concessions to the textile industry, GOP officials maintain that it is unable to remain competitive in the world market due to inability to match textile sector subsidies by the governments of India, Bangladesh and China.  2.  (SBU)  Pakistan is a beneficiary of various preference programs including a FTA with China that extends duty free access to most textiles and apparel, the South Asian Free Trade Area and EU GSP program.  However, high production costs and a focus on low value products mean that Pakistan is unable to take full advantage of the current preference programs.  GOP officials allege that its exclusion from the EU's GSP-Plus program favors Bangladesh and Sri Lanka over Pakistan. Pakistan exports mostly raw material and yarn to China rather than manufactured products.  However, U.S and EU safeguards on Chinese textiles have helped Pakistani exports, but their expiration in 2008 may further hit market share and stunt potential growth.  Textile and Apparel Production - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  3.  (U)  Pakistan's textile and apparel production was  $12.04 billion, or 38 percent of  total industrial production of $26.18 billion, for the Pakistani fiscal year 2006-2007 which ended June 30.  This represents a 2.1 percent decrease over the previous fiscal year.  The industrial sector employed approximately 6.9 million workers; the textile industry's share of industrial employment was estimated at 38 percent, or 2.6 million.  The GOP estimated total textile sector employment at 16 million, which includes cotton farmers and ginners.  In FY07, textiles' share of total exports was 63.2 percent.  Mixed Price Trends ------------------------  4.  (U)  Textile price trends were mixed, with the value of some export categories rising while others declined.  From FY06 to FY07, the price of cotton yarn increased by 2.9 percent, while knitwear .prices increased by 1.79 percent.  During the same period, prices for Pakistani bed linens dropped by 1.28 percent, while readymade garment prices fell by 3.92 percent.  The price of cotton cloth, however, increased by 15.1 percent.   The GOP calculated that unit price drops in major textile exports from July 2006 to April 2007, compared to a year earlier, translated into a loss of $484 million in export revenue.  5.  (SBU)  GOP interlocutors attributed the price decline to competition from low-priced Chinese, Indian and Bangladeshi textiles, increases in prima cotton prices used in the production of bed wear and garments and use of contaminated domestic cotton. (Comment:  In some cases, cotton producers do not remove foreign materials during the cotton and seed separation process.  These materials (e.g. hair, dust, pieces of cloth) are then incorporated into the thread and cloth.  No data is available regarding the magnitude of this problem or export revenue foregone because of low-priced contaminated cotton.  End comment.)  The GOP has begun a small-scale program to encourage farmers to clean cotton properly. Pakistan receives very little foreign direct investment in the  ISLAMABAD 00004208  002 OF 005   textile and apparel sector - less than $50 million, or 1.2 percent of total FDI between July 2006 and April 2007.  Textile Export Performance Falters - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  6.   (SBU)  More than 24 months after the end of the Multi Fiber agreement, Pakistan's exports decreased in FY2006-07. After 16.8 percent YoY growth in FY06, textile exports increased only by 5.2 percent to $10.75 billion in FY07.    Even star categories like cotton cloth exports (11.8 percent of total exports) dropped by 4.3 percent and bed linens exports (11.5 percent of total exports) slumped by 3.9 percent.  However, finished garment exports increased by 5.3 percent and knitwear exports increased by 12.1 percent. Yarn exports, principally to China, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, were up by 3.1 percent. Increased competition principally from China, India, Bangladesh and Turkey, combined with Pakistan's focus on lower value added products are reasons for this mixed picture.  7.  (SBU)  Pakistan only had limited success in diversifying its exports beyond the textile sector.  Textiles increased as a share of total exports from 62.1 in FY06 to 63.2 percent in FY07.  Pakistani textile exports to the U.S. dropped by 4.5 percent, compared to China (up 27.3%) and India (down 0.6 %) during January-July 2007. The removal of   safeguard measures by the U.S. and EU on textile exports from China in 2008 will further hit Pakistan's textile exports.  (Comment:  In our conversation with GOP trade and finance officials, we've noted a lack of planning for what will happen once the China safeguards expire in 2008.  End comment.)  8.  (SBU)  Pakistan's private sector has invested $6 billion in the textile industry over the last six years: 47 percent to the spinning sector and only 15 percent to the weaving sector. Neither sector is at full capacity.  Very little of this investment has gone into the value added sectors, such as garments and home textiles.  However the few, large firms which have invested in these products are highly automated, comply with international labor and environmental standards, and are very profitable.  However, they are worried about competition from China following safeguards expiration.  Moreover, Pakistan's Textile Ministry sources do not believe the sector will be able to sustain this level of investment because of rising interest rates.  9.  (SBU)  Pakistan has enjoyed a comparative advantage in textile categories, including bed linens, cotton fabrics, denim jeans, and knitted shirts; however, India is entering into these areas and is becoming more competitive. Textile Ministry officials told us that India provides Rs.350 billion (USD 7.2 billion) in subsidies to its textile sector and has identified it as a major employment generation sector.  Compared to India, Pakistan's textile industry faces high utility prices, low labor productivity, and energy shortages, which make its products less competitive.  GOP officials regularly acknowledge that Pakistan's overall textile industry also focuses more on low end products finished goods export market. The lack of brand ownership and export quality are impediments to moving up in value added chain. However, any move to the high end market will require new investment in high tech plants that comply with international environmental and labor standards, which is unlikely for the small family firms which still dominate Pakistan's textile sector.  Chinese textile safeguards help Pakistan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  10.  (SBU)  U.S and EU safeguard measures on Chinese textile and apparel exports have opened export opportunities for Pakistan in certain  categories, including socks, ladies' outer garments, cotton trousers and cotton tee shirts.  Pakistan, however, is not competitive in many of the 34 categories of the U.S.- China safeguard agreement.  Pakistan has not imposed any safeguard measures on Chinese textile imports, nor is it contemplating any such measures. In fact, Pakistan and China signed an FTA in November  ISLAMABAD 00004208  003 OF 005   2006, which permits duty-free imports of most of Chinese textiles into Pakistan. Pakistan is importing raw cotton, filament yarn, woven fabrics, apparel and finding and trimmings., knitted fabrics and hosiery from China.  China mostly imports raw cotton, cotton yarn, cotton thread and grey fabrics from Pakistan.  11. (SBU)  According to Textile Ministry sources, some 30 of 525 spinning factories closed within the last fiscal year. Mostly unskilled labor lost jobs due to these closures.  Belated GOP efforts to boost vocational training have not kept up with demand for skilled textile workers, and Pakistan continues to experience shortages of skilled workers and mid-level managers.  The GOP recently increased the national minimum wage from 4000 ($65.57) per month to 4600 rupees ($75.40) per month.  12.   Pakistan's labor legislation is generally consistent with the core ILO conventions, but enforcement is spotty, due to a lack of capacity.   Better working conditions, pay, work schedules, maternity leave and other similar issues tend to be concentrated in the export sector.  Very few plants, however, are unionized.  The government is amending its labor laws and factories acts to bring textile exporters into compliance with ILO standards. However, labor laws do not apply in EPZs. The Labor Ministry is working on labor regulations for EPZs with the help of Asian Development Bank.  Labor laws do apply in industrial parks.  Initiatives Undertaken to Increase Pakistan's Textile Competitiveness - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  13.  (SBU)  The GOP and private sector have undertaken a number of initiatives to improve the industry's competitiveness.  The State Bank of Pakistan is providing long-term financing for export-oriented projects at 7 and 6 percent, respectively, for 7-year and 3-year periods (well below current market interest rates of 12 to 13 percent).  A research and development subsidy of 6 percent of the export value given two years back for ready-made garments and knitwear exports will continue this year. In addition, a research and development subsidy has also been provided to exports of dyed/printed fabrics and home textiles at 3 percent of export value, and to dyed/printed home textiles at 5 percent of export value.  The purpose of these research and development subsidies is to improve quality and to increase market share. The GOP considers that its R&D subsidies are WTO-consistent.  14.  (SBU) The GOP is constructing textile/apparel industrial parks in Karachi, (completed by the end of this year), Lahore, and Faisalabad (both to be completed by the mid-2008).  The GOP still has not established tax break and duty incentives. The Commerce Ministry has advised the GOP that such a package would violate WTO rules. These new parks will provide infrastructure and utilities. By contrast, Pakistan's EPZs offer infrastructure facilities along with the tax and duty concessions on exports.  The GOP has also eliminated the sales tax on the import and local supply of raw materials utilized in the entire textile manufacturing process and the import duties on the raw materials, sub-components and components used in the manufacturing of textile machinery for the production of textile products. Custom duties, sales tax and other taxes on imported raw materials for the manufacture of textile products have been eliminated to avoid the need for duty drawback and refund claims under the revised and simplified Duty Drawback Scheme for all textile producers.  Pakistan a Textile Preference Program Beneficiary - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  15.  (SBU)  Pakistan is a beneficiary of various textile preference programs. China provides Pakistan with duty free access for its textiles under their bilateral Free Trade Agreement, which came into force in July 2007.  According to Pakistan's Textile Ministry, China  ISLAMABAD 00004208  004 OF 005   is mostly importing raw materials such as cotton yarn, grey fabrics and unprocessed fabrics from Pakistan, rather than the higher value finished items. Pakistan is importing raw cotton, filament yarn, woven fabrics, apparel and clothing accessories, knitted fabrics and hosiery from China.  16.  (SBU)  Most Pakistani textiles and apparel are beneficiaries of the EU's regular GSP program since January 2006. This program gives a 20 percent reduction in MFN duties for textiles. This program, however, does not compare favorably with the GSP-Plus concessions granted to other countries.  (Comment:  The EU's GSP Plus Program extends duty free treatment to textile products and also covers larger number of commodities compared to the EU's regular GSP program.  End Comment.) GOP officials maintain that Bangladesh's and Sri Lanka's EU GSP-plus status gives their products a competitive advantage. The EU also imposed 13.1 percent anti-dumping duty on Pakistani bed linen, which was subsequently reduced to 5.8 percent after consultations. Pakistan has not taken this case to the WTO because consultations are on-going.  The GOP is pessimistic that it will be able to remain competitive in U.S. and EU markets, where Pakistani textiles face 12-18 percent duties compared to tariff treatment under NAFTA, AGOA, and CAFTA beneficiaries receive. Pakistan also has a free trade agreement with Sri Lanka, but textiles are excluded.   The South Asian Free Trade Agreement also extends duty free treatment to textiles but stringent non-tariff barriers effectively prohibit textile trade.   Private Sector View - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 17.  (SBU) All Pakistan Textile Mills Association (APTMA, which represents the producers of the yarn and fabrics) expressed its concern over last year's textile export performance. Textile exports fell short of the target by $600-700 million in FY06-07. They attributed the poor performance to rise in production costs, due to high cotton prices (70 percent of production costs) and expensive utilities (10 percent of production costs).  Currently Pakistan consumes 16 million bales of cotton, but only produces 13 million bales (Pakistan imported high quality prima cotton from U.S. amounting to $117.8 million in 2006.), thus driving up the overall price for production. APTMA also attributed slow growth in the textile sector to India and Bangladesh's textile sector subsidies and the EU GSP-plus trade preferences for Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. In addition, interest rates have always been crucial for Pakistan's highly leveraged textile industry. Tightening monetary policy has made it more difficult for textile manufacturers to repay the loans they took out in the era of cheaper money (When interest rates are low, Pakistani banks usually advance loans on floating interest rates.).  18.  (SBU)  The All Pakistan Readymade Garments Association sources said that the readymade garment sector had seen an increase in orders and enjoyed good growth prospects in the post-quota regime. However, they also expressed concern about inadequate infrastructure, high utility prices and bureaucratic problems such as procedural delays and red tape from Ministries of Finance, Commerce and Customs which prevent the sector from realizing its full potential. The Association especially appreciated the GOP Trade Policy initiative that provides for granting export processing zone status to those garment units that export 70 percent of their production.  Comment - - - - - - -  19.  (SBU)  With textiles comprising nearly two-thirds of Pakistan's export market, the GOP is right to be concerned about the performance of this sector.  We were told in July that the part of the explanation for the drop in exports is the phase out of certain subsidies including duty and tax refund programs (which were being misused by small exporters) and their replacement with no duty/no drawback.  However, the decreasing competitiveness of the sector,  ISLAMABAD 00004208  005 OF 005   sizeable subsidy programs in competitor countries, and greater EU trade preferences for key regional competitors are the primary causes for the drop in exports.  We continue to be struck by the lack of planning and consideration for what could happen once the U.S. China safeguards expire.  We are hopeful the passage of the Reconstruction Opportunity Zone (ROZ) legislation and possible establishment of textile plants in the ROZs will help increase exports.  But the GOP and the textile sector need to focus on training, energy needs, infrastructure, and supply and competitiveness issues in order to maintain current market shares. End comment. " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4206", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "9/29/2007 13:02", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004209  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: REACTION TO PRO-MUSHARRAF RULING  REF: ISLAMABAD 4206  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Musharraf's spokesman lauded the September 28 Supreme Court ruling allowing the President to run for re-election in uniform and called on all sides to respect the rule of law.  Musharraf's coalition partner, the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), called on Musharraf to doff his uniform before the October 6 presidential election. Amid street protests by lawyers' groups, the Election Commission September 29 approved the candidacy of Musharraf, Pakistan People's Party (PPP) nominee Amin Fahim and Wajihuddin Ahmed, a retired justice.  Fahim and Ahmed may challenge Musharraf's candidacy in the courts next week.  The opposition continues to try and organize a mass resignation October 2 from the National and Provincial Assemblies.  End summary.  \"President respects ruling.\" ----------------------------  2. (U) \"The President respects and honors the judgment of the Supreme Court, as always,\" said presidential spokesman Rashid Qureshi.  Government supporters celebrated into the night after the Supreme Court ruled late September 28 to dismiss on technical grounds the challenges to Musharraf's right to run for re-election in uniform.  The press framed this pro-Musharraf ruling as a \"great victory\" for the President after a summer of losses before the same court.  3. (U) Speaking at an emergency cabinet meeting, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz urged the opposition \"to show enough courage to accept the ruling as justice demands.\"  Aziz turned to the October 6 election, predicting that the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML)-MQM coalition would have enough votes to elect Musharraf and would not seek the support of any other parties, including the PPP.  MQM leaders called the Supreme Court decision \"historic,\" but also urged Musharraf to take off the uniform before the October 6 election.  Bhutto: \"This is a temporary reprieve.\" ---------------------------------------  4. (U) PPP leader Benazir Bhutto is quoted as saying that \"this is a temporary reprieve and the real test will come when the nomination is challenged.\"  Reacting to the technical grounds on which the petitions were rejected by the Court, Bhutto predicted that Musharraf would face another \"more serious\" legal challenge once his nomination was accepted by the Election Commission.  Disunited Opposition --------------------  5. (C) The All Pakistan Democratic Movement (APDM) opposition group organized by Nawaz Sharif offered resigned disapproval.  PML-Nawaz acting president Makhdoom Javed Hashmi (recently released from jail) labeled the Court's ruling as \"a continuation of the infamous doctrine of necessity,\" used by prior military dictatorships.  The APDM continues to try and organize a mass resignation October 2 from the National and Provincial Assemblies in order to embarrass Musharraf.  But the religious block in APDM remains divided on the issue and, without PPP support, this endeavor also threatens to fizzle out.  Election Commission Validates; Police Overreact --------------------------------------------- --  6. (C) The Election Commission September 29 approved the nominations for Musharraf, PPP candidate Amin Fahim and former Supreme Court Justice Wajihuddin Ahmed.  Attorneys for Fahim and Ahmed registered their objections with the Election Commission to Musharraf's eligibility; the Commission promptly rejected them.  Yesterday's Supreme Court ruling was based largely on the technicality that the petitioners had no stake in the process; today, there are two opposition candidates who now have a legal stake and may act upon it. Ahmed likely will appeal next week to the Supreme Court. Fahim told A/DCM that if the Musharraf-Bhutto power sharing agreement is not completed by October 1, he is considering  ISLAMABAD 00004209  002 OF 002   another legal challenge to Musharraf as well.  7. (C) Police were again massed in riot control gear September 29 in front of the Election Commission and the Supreme Court.  Several hundred lawyers clashed with police, who fired tear gas into the crowd.  Several people, including journalists, were injured, and at least two participants were hospitalized.  Comment -------  8. (C) The pro-Musharraf decision by the Supreme Court was not a surprise, and much of the reaction by the GOP and the various opposition groups was pre-scripted.  The PPP is predicating its next steps on progress in the ongoing Musharraf-Bhutto negotiations, but they are running out of time to seal the agreement.  The rest of the opposition has so far been unable to unite on a common strategy to embarrass Musharraf with a mass resignation on October 2.  Musharraf's legal battles could resume as early as Monday.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4209", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/2/2007 2:04", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004235  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: ISLAMABAD POLICE CHIEF SUSPENDED ON SUPREME COURT ORDERS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4209  Classified By: A/DCM Candace Putnam, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Responding to the violence used to quell lawyers' protests in Islamabad September 29, the Supreme Court ordered the arrest and suspension of the Islamabad Police Inspector and two of his deputies.  GOP Interior Secretary Syed Kamal Shah responded by suspending Islamabad's Police Inspector General Marwat Ali Shah, Police Senior Superintendent Naeem Khan, and Deputy Commissioner Chaudhry Mohammad Ali.  An Interior Ministry official privately told Embassy that the suspension was just a \"formality.\"  Both PM Aziz and Information Minister Durrani promised investigations over the incident.  2. (U) The media provided emotional front-page coverage of the September 29 clashes between police and several hundred lawyers/human rights activities who were protesting the Election Commission's approval of Musharraf's presidential nomination (reftel).  The Court noted that several lawyers, as well as journalists covering the event, were injured by televised baton-wielding police, and the bandaged victims appeared today in the Court.  3. (C) Comment:  Following accusations from opposition and civil society groups that it had caved in to Musharraf by dismissing the cases against him, the Court opted for a public reproach to the GOP over how it handled this demonstration.  Rather than challenging the Chief Justice, the GOP agreed to what appears to be a face-saving gesture for the Court.  End Summary  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/2/2007 8:22", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004254  SIPDIS  STATE FOR SCA/PB, EB/TPP USDA FOR FAS/OCRA/SHATZ/RADLER, OGA/CHAUDHRY/ROCKE, OFSO/DEVER USAID FOR ANE MWARD COMMERCE FOR ANESA/OSA DOHA FOR FCS/PEASLEE  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS:  ETRD, ECON, EAGR, PREL, PK  SUBJECT:  PAKISTAN'S WHEAT SHORTAGE AND FOOD INFLATION ADD TO RAMADAN WORRIES  1.  SUMMARY:  During this year's holy month of Ramadan, the average Pakistani is more concerned about finding a bag of flour than who will win the upcoming elections.  A combination of overly optimistic production estimates, increased domestic consumption, a temporary lifting of the export ban, and rising food inflation have produced a demand for wheat imports despite 2006 carryover wheat stocks of over four million tons.  2.  Over the first week of Ramadan, wheat flour was selling at nearly twice pre-Ramadan levels - if bags of flour could be found at all.  Accusations of hoarding abound.  The price of all food items has risen 40 percent since the start of the holy days.  The GOP's announcement on September 15 that they will allow the import of one million tons of wheat somewhat calmed the markets as overall price inflation has begun to ease.  In addition to the desire for food prices to return to normal, Pakistanis have two questions.  Where is the wheat and will hoarders be punished for their actions?  END SUMMARY.  INFLATED CROP ESTIMATE STARTED THE TROUBLE ------------------------------------------  3.  The GOP continues to maintain its estimate of a 2007 bumper wheat crop of 23.5 million tons, despite average yearly production of about 21.5 million tons.  Analysts questioned the official estimate throughout the growing season since the wheat planted area increased by only one percent over the previous crop year, while the official estimate reflected an incredible 10 percent rise in production.  Growing conditions were indeed favorable, but most believe the crop is at least one million tons lower than the GOP estimate.  (Comment:  FAS Islamabad's unofficial forecast of the crop in March 2007 was 21.8 million tons.  End Comment.)  4.  In April 2007, the GOP lifted the ban on wheat exports that was imposed in 2003.  Traders quickly took advantage of the wide price spread between Pakistani wheat and the international grain market. Exporters shipped out 500,000 tons of wheat before the GOP reinstated the export ban on wheat by land and sea on May 25, 2007. Despite the small window of opportunity, exports had the desired effect of raising farm prices.  However, wheat exports also had the negative effect of starting the spiral of food inflation which would slowly simmer in early summer to ignite during Ramadan.   FOOD INFLATION MAJOR CONCERN ----------------------------  5.  The GOP's inflation target for both FY 2007 and FY 2008 (July-June) was established at 6.5 percent.  In FY 2007, the CPI actually rose 7.8 percent.  It is estimated that the FY 2008 CPI will increase by 7.5 percent, mainly reflecting higher food prices. Food inflation this August alone reached 8.6 percent as prices for rice, beans, peas, lentils, vegetables, fruit and other food commodities rose steeply.  6.  Wheat and flour prices began rising in May, following the brief opening of the wheat export window.  By August, accusations of speculative hoarding by major traders and businessmen in Punjab and Sindh Provinces were rampant.  In May, a kilo of wheat flour cost 12-14 rupees ($0.20-0.23).  By the first week of Ramadan, the cost of flour had risen 80 to 85 percent to 22 rupees ($0.37), with widespread concern that prices would soon rise 100% to 25 rupees ($0.42).  7.  While wheat and flour prices initiated the inflation spiral, the cost of all food items rose 40 percent during the first week of Ramadan, due in part to the paradoxical increased demand for food during the month-long daylight fast.  Families normally hold large \"iftari\" evening meals to break the Ramadan fast, inviting family and friends.  This feasting/fasting cycle causes not only digestive complaints and weight gain, but contributes to food inflation as families prepare larger and more elaborate than normal meals.  8.  In response to supply problems and inflationary pressure, the GOP began releasing wheat stocks to flour mills on September 7.  On September 15, the GOP announced its intention to import 1 million tons of wheat.  These combined actions caused a lagged reaction the following week as flour prices in the major cities are now floating around 16-18 rupees ($0.27-0.30) per kilo, approaching the GOP's original target price of 14.25 rupees ($0.24) per kilo.  Prices in the NWFP and Balochistan are generally slightly higher due to  transportation costs -- reportedly around 20 rupees ($0.33) per kilo.  WHERE'S THE WHEAT? ------------------  9.  Despite the government's inflated crop estimate, there should have been plenty of wheat flour available in Pakistan at this time of year.  However, a series of events caused a chain reaction resulting in empty shelves of wheat flour at retail outlets.  10.  While destinations and volumes of exports during the April-May period are not yet officially released, likely buyers of the 500,000 tons include countries in the Middle East and South Asia, as well as India.  In addition, at least one million tons of wheat and wheat flour was smuggled into India and Iran due to the favorable price differentials.  While a Pakistani living in a border town can earn about one third more than his daily wage as a laborer by smuggling a single 20 kilo bag of flour into India, most smuggling is organized and carried out by influential groups.  11.  Due to a lack of operating flour mills, wheat is not normally exported to Afghanistan. Consequently, flour is legally exported to Afghanistan with a 15 percent export tax.  In addition, illegal smuggling into Afghanistan and onwards to the Central Asian Republics has siphoned flour out of Pakistan.  12.  Speculative hoarders, mainly big commodity traders and others with sufficient influence and warehouse capacity, could be sitting on as much as 2 million tons of wheat.  It is assumed that the GOP knows where much of this wheat is located but the public and press are doubtful that any of the hoarders will be held responsible for their actions.  13.  A final factor is domestic consumption which has increased this year as well.  Most of the domestic wheat utilization of 22 million tons is for human consumption; however, the high price of corn and broken rice relative to wheat has resulted in farmers increasing their utilization of wheat in poultry and livestock feed.  Also, the high price of rice has contributed to increased human consumption of wheat.  This has likely pushed domestic wheat demand above 23 million tons.  14.  Taking all of the above into consideration, and assuming the GOP maintains its 4 million ton wheat reserve, analysts calculate the shortfall in wheat anywhere between 1.5 and 2.5 million tons.  IMPORTS NEEDED DURING A PERIOD OF WORLDWIDE SHORTAGE --------------------------------------------- -------  15.  On September 15, 2007, Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz announced that the GOP would import one million tons of wheat, stating that this action was necessary to \"maintain a reasonable buffer stock for the future.\"  The export price for Pakistani wheat during the April-May export window was approximately $225-232 per ton.  For December 2007 delivery, Pakistan is now looking at an import price of $380-400 per ton.  The timing couldn't be worse.  World wheat stocks are at a 26-year low, mainly due to severe weather conditions in the major production areas of Canada, Australia, the EU and Ukraine.  Consequently, wheat prices have hit all-time record highs.   16.  The GOP subsequently decided to make smaller wheat purchases, rather than a single 1 million ton purchase.  It announced a tender for 100,000 tons of wheat for December delivery with additional tenders expected monthly.  GOP officials cited overbooking at the Port of Karachi and the problems berthing larger vessels as well as the need for a monthly review of the wheat situation as reasons for moving away from a single tender.  They have also hinted that they may lift the ban on private imports.  We expect that Pakistan will provide a subsidy for the imported wheat to cover the differential between the government issue price and the import price.  COMMENT -------  17.  (SBU) The GOP unwittingly walked into a perfect storm scenario on wheat during the election season.  Not only were its initial estimates of this year's wheat harvest overly optimistic, but its well-intentioned decision to lift the four-year wheat export ban further contributed to shortages and price increases.  Increased  Ramadan demand further contributed to price increases and supply shortages.  Inflation, particularly food inflation, is frequently cited in polls here as a primary concern of the Pakistani public. It is surprising that the Pakistanis have borne this inconvenience stoically, with no demonstrations or violence that might have occurred elsewhere.  18.  (SBU) The food \"crisis\" scenario which played out this summer points to the fact that the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock does not have a coordinated long-term commodity policy. There are no staff economists or commodity experts advising policymakers on critical issues affecting the wider economy. Consequently, the GOP did not have the foresight to see the implications of maintaining an artificially high crop estimate or allowing wheat exports.  Lowering the official crop estimate would have had the same effect on farm prices as exports, while keeping more wheat within Pakistan.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4209|07ISLAMABAD4235", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/2/2007 14:06", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004271  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/02/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: ANOTHER LEGAL BATTLE FOR MUSHARRAF; MASS POLITICAL RESIGNATIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4209      B. ISLAMABAD 4235  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan's Supreme Court agreed October 2 to begin immediate hearings on petitions filed by two opposition presidential candidates challenging Musharraf's right to seek re-election in uniform.  Simultaneously, in an effort to embarrass Musharraf, 86 opposition politicians resigned en masse from the National Assembly, and others resigned from three of the four Provincial Assemblies.  Notably, Pakistan People's Party members did not resign.  On both the legal and political front, the GOP voiced confidence that Musharraf will be re-elected on October 6.  End summary.  ---------------------- Back to Court for Some ----------------------  2. (U) Pakistan's Supreme Court will hear October 3 petitions challenging Musharraf's right to seek re-election in uniform.  The cases were filed by Musharraf's two main presidential challengers to Musharraf -- Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Amin Fahim and the legal fraternities' Wajihuddin Ahmed. Their petitions appeal the September 29 decision of Pakistan's Election Commission that Musharraf is an eligible candidate.  3. (U) Fahim's petition further asks the Court to stay the October 6 election until a final judgment can be reached. The Ahmed petition also argues that the next president should be chosen by new National and Provincial Assemblies after a general election.  4. (C) While the opposition has gotten the Supreme Court to hear the two petitions immediately, they lost their bid to have the full 17-member bench rule on the joined case. Instead, a nine-justice panel, led by pro-Musharraf Justice Javed Iqbal, will hear the case.  Iqbal is one of five justices who will serve on this panel and also were part of the 6-3 ruling in Musharraf's favor on September 28.  ----------------- Mass Resignations -----------------  5. (U) Joined by 1,000 peaceful demonstrators, 86 National Assembly members belonging to the opposition All Pakistan Democratic Movement (APDM) marched October 2 on parliament to resign prior to the presidential contest.  Speaking at the October 2 resignation rally, Parliamentary opposition leader Fazlur Rehman, of the religious Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam party (JUI-F), announced more demonstrations for October 6. Pakistan's Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) leader Imran Khan went further, predicting that the public would join opposition legislators in the streets.  6. (U) Opposition party members also resigned October 2 from three of the four Provincial Assemblies -- Punjab (46), Balochistan (25) and Sindh (7).  Resignations from the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) Assembly were postponed by procedural action to block the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA)-controlled Assembly from dissolving.  7.  (C)  Noticeably absent from those resigning were PPP politicians.  Septels report on progress made in Musharraf-Bhutto negotiations over a power-sharing arrangement.  A key component of that deal is Bhutto's promise not to support PPP resignations.  8. (C) Comment:  Musharraf now faces yet another legal hurdle, although the composition of this bench would seem to favor a pro-Musharraf decision.  He still has the simple majority of votes required for re-election, and in a sign of his growing confidence, Musharraf named General Kiyani the new Vice Chief of Army Staff, to be come the new Chief when Musharraf resigns.  Behind the scenes, however, Musharraf's party is working overtime to close the deal with Bhutto and block dissolution of any of the four Provincial Assemblies required to ensure his re-election. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/2/2007 14:07", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004273  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/29/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, PTER, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S INTRODUCTORY CALL ON FAZLUR REHMAN  Classified By: Anne. W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d).  1.  (C)  Summary.  During a September 28 courtesy call with National Assembly Opposition Leader Fazlur Rehman, Ambassador discussed U.S. plans to provide economic and social development assistance to Pakistan's tribal areas, U.S.-Afghan policy, and our support for democracy in Pakistan.  Rehman repeatedly indicated a desire to work for peace and against extremism, but, not suprisingly, said he believes coalition military operations in Afghanistan undermine those goals. Rehman, who is know as being the shrewdest politician in Pakistan, strikes us as being a classic power broker who knows he holds several trump cards in the coming Pakistani elections.  End Summary.  FATA Development ----------------  2. (C)  Ambassador described the U.S. plans for providing economic, health and education assistance in the Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA) and said the U.S. hoped that the Rehman and his JUI-F party would support these efforts to improve the quality of life in FATA.  Rehman responded that the had been supporting USAID efforts since they restarted programs five to six years ago and would continue to do so.  Afghanistan -----------  3.  (C)  However, Rehman said that the situation in the FATA was being influenced by events in Afghanistan.  Rehman's repeatedly said his Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) supports peace and reconciliation as the only way forward in Afghanistan, but the violence there is spilling over into the FATA.  Reiterating views he has expressed publicly, Rehman said that the Afghan people are not convinced that U.S. intentions are positive, and this is a problem for both the U.S. and for Pakistan.  He noted that the USSR had promised Afghanistan economic aid but no one believed them; now, the Afghan people doubt the ultimate U.S. goals as well.   He urged the U.S. to shift from a military strategy to one based on economic and political development.  4.  (C)  Ambassador responded that the U.S. is supports the Afghan government and President Karzai's efforts at political reconciliation.  The U.S. and its coalition allies have no intention of being a permanent occupying force, but we must help the GOA establish security and are committed in the long term to assisting economic and social development in both Afghanistan and Pakistan.  5. (C)  Rehman said that these were good intentions; he recognizes the power of the U.S. and welcomes its positive support.  Rehman said Karzai had spoken to him about national reconciliation as well.  But he questioned whether the Afghan outreach was anything more than a goodwill gesture.  He told Karzai that it was important to engage the insurgents, as there could be no progress on reconciliation without them. But how, he asked, can Karzai engage the Taliban when they are living in caves, hiding out because they are labeled as terrorists?  Ambassador noted that this issue had been discussed when the Deputy Secretary met in Kabul with Pakistan and Afghan Presidential Advisors Aziz and Rassoul. The Afghan government has opened the door to those who sincerely wanted reconciliation.  Pakistan Politics ------------------  6.  (C)  Ambassador reitered U.S. support for free and fair elections in Pakistan and asked Rehman for his views on the current political scene.  Rehman replied that he had worked with previous administrations, including those of Zia al-Haq and Benazir Bhutto.  He supported the return of both Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto.  Bhutto will discover, he predicted, that she is out of touch with the common man in Pakistan.  He suggested that Bhutto believes she can use U.S. support to \"make fools\" of people here.  He was concerned that some of Bhutto's recent statements were alienating Pakistanis, especially in his party. He cited Bhutto's comments against madrassas and her stated intention to eliminate extremism.  It appeared, he said, that she was  ISLAMABAD 00004273  002 OF 002   parroting U.S. concerns without understanding the true situation in Pakistan and this would not help national reconciliation.  7.  (C)  According to Rehman, JUI-F wants to give the extremists \"sentimental satisfaction\" so that they will work within the constitutional framework.  This will allow them to vet their grievances.  He suggested that if the JUI-F is included in a ruling coalition, this will enhance efforts to moderate extremist groups.  If Bhutto controls the coalition, however, this will lead to confrontational politics that will spill over to damage Pakistan's relations with Afghanistan, India, China, Iran and ultimately the U.S.  What was needed, according to Rehman, was balance to create a prosperous, peaceful Pakistan that has good relations with the U.S.  In closing, Rehman said he had been invited to attend the National Prayer Breakfast in Washington three years in a row but was disappointed he could never get a visa.  8.  (C)  Comment.  Rehman is considered to be the shrewdest politician in Pakistan.  The JUI-F is the largest member of the religious parties bloc, is included in the coalition ruling the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), and holds sway over the largest group of tribes in the FATA.  This makes Rehman capable of delivering the NWFP assembly to Musharraf in the presidential election, providing the key Senate votes required for a constitutional amendment that Benazir Bhutto needs to serve a potential third term as prime minister, or throwing his considerable political weight behind the opposition party block organized by Nawaz Sharif.  9.  (C)  In his meeting with the Deputy Secretary (Reftel), Musharraf mentioned Rehman three times as the key figure in GOP efforts to control extremism in the FATA and balance what will be perceived locally as an overly pro-Western alliance between Musharraf and Bhutto.  In exchange, Musharraf reportedly will offer Rehman a key government position in the NWFP government.  Rehman's ultimate goal is to be prime minister, but he knows that scenario is out of reach at the moment.  10.  (C)  Rehman talks to and takes favors from all sides, including Taliban supporters in the FATA and across the border in Afghanistan.  He met last week with recently deported former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in Saudi Arabia (Note: the GOP released him from house arrest of opposition leaders in order to travel to Saudi for umrah and meet with Nawaz.  end note).  He is critical of U.S. policies in Afghanistan.  But he does not strike us as being an extreme Islamic fundamentalist; instead, he is more of a classic power broker who knows he holds several trump cards in the coming elections.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4271", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/3/2007 14:14", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004290  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: UPDATE ON OPPOSITION RESIGNATIONS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4271  1. (U) Eighty-six members of the opposition alliance All Pakistan Democratic Movement (APDM) resigned October 2 from the National Assembly, according to Speaker Chaudhary Amir Hussain.  The speaker's office has not yet formally accepted the resignations, but Hussain announced that he would consult a legal expert on whether they could be accepted before the October 6 presidential election.  2. (U) Also on October 2, opposition politicians resigned from three of the four provincial assemblies - Balochistan, Sindh and Punjab.  Speakers of Balochistan and Sindh Assemblies have already accepted their colleagues' resignations.  The Punjab Assembly Speaker has not yet formally responded to the 46 assembly members who filed resignations there.  3. (U) Two members of Mutihidda Majlis-e-Amal (MMA), the main component of APDM, have already retracted their resignations of yesterday from the Balochistan Assembly.  In the Sindh Assembly, another member of MMA refused to resign, defecting to the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (Quaid-e-Azam Group).  NWFP: Pro-Government Forces Stall Assembly's Dissolution.  4. (U) In the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), the pro-government minority bloc preempted dissolution of the MMA-controlled assembly by launching a no confidence vote against NWFP Chief Minister Akram Khan Durrani.  If the assembly is eventually dissolved, the APDM hopes to undermine Musharraf's political legitimacy, although such an action would have no effect on his re-election.  In its October 3 session to debate and vote on the no confidence motion, media reported \"a rumpus in the house,\" causing the assembly's speaker to adjourn the session until October 4. 5. (SBU) Comment: Despite these resignations, the GOP is confident of the final count on October 6, secure in the knowledge that Musharraf has the votes for re-election regardless of the opposition's political maneuvers.  Rampant reports of a Musharraf-Bhutto deal in the form of a \"National Reconciliation Ordinance\" also seems to have buoyed the pro-Musharraf camp.  The GOP is hoping that the opposition Pakistan People's Party (PPP) will keep its members in the assemblies and simply abstain, legitimizing the process and not recording a vote against Musharraf.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3290", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/3/2007 14:19", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004291  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/03/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, PK SUBJECT: RED MOSQUE RE-OPENS FOLLOWING SUPREME COURT DECISION  REF: ISLAMABAD 3290  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d )  1. (U) A two-member Supreme Court bench ordered October 2 the re-opening of Islamabad's Lal Masjid (Red Mosque) and two thousand people gathered there today (October 3) for afternoon prayers.  The mosque has remained closed since the July military operation against followers of Maulana Abdul Aziz and Maulana Abdur Rashid Ghazi (reftel).  In an unexpected move, the government appointed Aziz's nephew as the mosque's temporary Naib Imam.  2. (U) The Court also ordered the reconstruction of adjoining madrassa Jamia Hafsa and compensation payments to victims' families.  However, the Court simultaneously allowed the Capital Development Authority (CDA) to expedite construction of an Islamic research facility, which would encroach on Jamia Hafsa land.  This was the original bone of contention between the government and the former imams, sparking a four-month standoff.  3. (C) Comment: The re-opening of the Red Mosque and its return to the hands of its former leadership is an unwelcome development.  The mosque and adjacent madrassa have long been centers and rallying points for violent extremism in the heart of Islamabad's moderate capital.  Interior Minister Sherpao has told us that the GOP has evidence linking the Red Mosque leadership to extremism in the tribal areas and suicide bombings in Islamabad.  One such bombing occurred the same day that the GOP tried to re-open the Red Mosque the last time.  Al Qaeda's latest video specifically cited the GOP's Red Mosque operation in rallying forces against Musharraf and the Pakistan government.  Today's re-opening was peaceful, and the court's decision may represent its attempt to seek middle ground between the government and followers of the mosque.  However, it is hard to see how opening the door for the mosque to resume its position as a platform and safehaven for militant extremists can benefit anyone but the extremists.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/4/2007 11:20", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004302  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS:  EFIN, ECON, PREL, EINV, EIND, EINT, PK SUBJECT: TERADATA:  AMERICAN COMPANY WITH PAKISTANI TIES GOES PUBLIC   1. (SBU) A/DCM and Economic Officers watched (via satellite feed) American company NCR spin off its new subsidiary Teradata into a stand-alone company by ringing the New York Stock Exchange opening bell on October 1.  The new Managing Director of Teradata, Khuram Rahat (also the former Managing Director of NCR Pakistan) then unveiled the company's new logo.  Rahat stated that Teradata will focus on its customers and on establishing Teradata as a leader in technology consulting.  2. (SBU)  Also attending the ceremony was Norwegian-owned TeleNor Pakistan Limited CEO Tore Johnsen.  Telenor is one of the most successful cellular telecom firms in Pakistan. NADRA's (National Database Registration Authority) Chairman Brig.General (rtd) Saleen Moeen also attended. Teradata began development of NADRA's state-of-the-art biometric identity card.  Included among Teradata's clients in Pakistan are four of the seven top telecommunication companies and a large number of banks and financial institutions.  3.  (SBU) Pakistan is core of Teradata's Global Consulting Center (GCC) operations for its worldwide operations.  The GCC is a call center and offers software development/IT solutions.  Teradata Pakistan plans to hire 250 new employees over the next year to add to its nearly 300 current employees.  4.   (SBU)  Parent company NCR (National Cash Register Company) is known for making the first mechanical cash registers.  Now, the NCR logo can be seen over ATM machines and is known worldwide as a leader in data warehousing and information technology.  Teradata will take over the data warehousing business and offer consulting solutions to corporate customers, while NCR focuses on products. Teradata will also be added to the S&P 500 Index and the NYSE Archa Tech 100 (SM) Index, an indication that it is a stock worth watching.  NCR shareholders, including executives in Pakistan, received one share of Teradata common stock for every one share of common stock they held in NCR as of September 14, 2007.  NCR has a market capitalization of $4.3 billion and Teradata has a market capitalization of $5.0 billion.  Both NCR and Teradata's stock has been trading around $25 a share this week.  5. (SBU) COMMENT:  Currently Teradata's India operations handle U.S. customers; however, the Pakistan GCC is well positioned to move into the U.S. market.  With increasing labor and other costs in India and a pool of well-educated IT professionals, Pakistan is experiencing growth in many outsourcing, call center, and IT operations.  With its deep client base firmly established in Pakistan's strong telecommunications and financial sector, Teradata is poised to take advantage of continued growth in these sectors.  END COMMENT.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD2944", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/5/2007 13:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004336  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: COURT ORDERS VOTER ROLLS POSTED ON THE ELECTION COMMISSION'S WEBSITE  REF: ISLAMABAD 2944  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (SBU) Pakistan's Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry ordered October 4 the country's Election Commission (ECP) to finalize the voter list by October 25 and post it on the ECP's website.  The list will be used in the parliamentary elections which are expected in early January 2008.  2. (SBU) Political parties, civil society groups and international donors (including the Embassy) have been lobbying for free electronic access to the draft voter list for months.  The ECP repeatedly rejected proposals to put the list on the web because this requirement was not codified in the electoral law.  3. (C) In response to a Pakistan People's Party (PPP) petition, the Court on July 26 ordered the ECP to add 30 million names to the voter rolls in 30 days by adding names from the 2002 voter list to the draft 2007 list.  The ECP now has added 27 million names to the list through this process. Unfortunately, the 2002 list includes a great many duplicates and fraudulent entries, so the final voter list will be far from perfect.  4. (C) Comment: This decision by the Court is long overdue. It will enable political parties to better motivate their voters and will contribute to the transparency of the electoral process.  A reconciliation package negotiated by the government with the PPP was also announced October 5.  It includes provisions to establish a new parliamentary ethics committee, outline an electoral code of conduct for the political parties, and fight fraud by enforcing requirements that electoral results at the polling places be certified by all the political party representatives.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4271|07ISLAMABAD4309", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/5/2007 13:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004337  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF SIGNS DEAL WITH BHUTTO; COURT DELAYS RELEASE OF OFFICIAL ELECTION TALLY  REF: (A) ISLAMABAD 4309 (B) ISLAMABAD 4271  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary.  President Musharraf October 5 signed the \"reconciliation package\" sealing his agreement with Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto.  Meanwhile, Pakistan's Supreme Court ruled that the presidential election, scheduled for October 6, can proceed.  However, the Court barred the Election Commission from announcing the official election results until petitions from two presidential challengers can be heard in full.  The government plans to hold the election and issue unofficial results.  End Summary.  Reconciliation Package  2.  (C)  President Musharraf October 5 signed the \"reconciliation package\" negotiated over the past few days with Pakistan People's Party leader Benazhir Bhutto (Ref A and previous).  The deal grants indemnity to Bhutto and other politicians and civil servants accused of corruption.  The package also includes measures to increase electoral transparency and outline a code of conduct for the political parties.  Court Ruling  3.  (C)  The Supreme Court October 5 also upheld the Election Commission's decision to hold the presidential election on October 6.  The Court has been hearing two petitions filed by presidential candidates Amin Fahim (Pakistan People's Party) and Wajihudden Ahmed (lawyers' fraternity).  The petitions challenge the Election Commission's decision to allow Musharraf to run for re-election in uniform.  One of those petitions asked the Court to stay the election until a decision had been reached on the cases; the Court denied that request today.  However, the Court also ordered the Election Commission not to release official results of the polling until after it had finished hearing the two cases. The Court plans to renew hearing arguments on the case October 17, after the Eid holiday. Court sources expect it will take at least two weeks to complete arguments.  4. (C) President Musharraf issued a statement saying he would accept the Court's verdict.  Ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) Secretary General and Senator Mushahid Hussain told A/DCM that the parliament would go forward with the process and announce the \"unofficial\" results of the election after the voting.  Attorney General Malik Qayyum welcomed the ruling, saying that it was an acceptance of Musharraf standing for election while remaining Chief of Army Staff. Ahmed's spokesperson called today's judgment \"a half victory,\" indicating there was still a chance that the Court would rule against Musharraf.  5. (C)  PPP party members have not yet received instructions from Bhutto over whether to attend, abstain or participate in tomorrow's election.  PPP attorney Khosa told Poloff that if the deal goes through, he expects that Amin Fahim will withdraw his candidacy.  This would pave the way for the PPP to support the election with its presence but abstain from the vote, as worked out in the Musharraf-Bhutto agreement. Fahim suggested to the Ambassador that he would still be a candidate, so we are not sure if the PPP has a made a final decision.  6. (C)  Comment:  Approval of the reconciliation package caps painstaking negotiations to form what will be a difficult partnership between Musharraf and Bhutto.  Musharraf has the votes in the electoral college to win re-election October 6, but the resignation of 86 National Assembly and significant numbers of Provincial Assembly members may weaken his legitimacy.  Still, Musharraf has gotten a serious shot in the arm from the Bhutto deal since the PPP has the most democratic credibility among the rather sorry panoply of Pakistani parties.  7.  (C)  Following today's ruling, the specter of yet another Court decision against Musharraf still hangs in the air. Government supporters are betting that the Court's decision after the fact of the election will be irrelevant, and many analysts here agree.  Bhutto will resume planning for a  ISLAMABAD 00004337  002 OF 002   triumphant arrival in Karachi October 18.  Both Musharraf and Bhutto likely will turn to shoring up support for the deal within their rank and file and preparing for parliamentary elections that will determine the balance of power between them in the next government.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4064|07ISLAMABAD4337", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/6/2007 13:53", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004340  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF (UNOFFICIALLY) WINS ANOTHER 5-YEAR TERM  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4337      B. ISLAMABAD 4064  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: According to unofficial results, President Musharraf has been re-elected by Pakistan's electoral college to another five-year term.  An October 5 Supreme Court decision barred Pakistan's Election Commission from announcing the official results until pending court cases against Musharraf are adjudicated.  In an effort to undercut Musharraf's credibility, most opposition party members were absent from the assemblies because they had resigned over the last few days.  Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP) abided by her deal with Musharraf and did not resign. However, by not even appearing during today's voting, the PPP continues to hold back its full support.  Bhutto is expected to make an official announcement later today.  End summary.  Unofficial Results  2. (SBU) President Musharraf appears to have won in the presidential polls October 6.  Voting took place in Pakistan's Electoral College, which is composed of the National and Provincial Assemblies, from 10 am to 3 pm October 6.   Members could vote any time during the period, so most came in, voted, talked to colleagues, and left. Following the voting the Election Commission tallied the results in the presence of party representatives; because of the October 5 Supreme Court ruling, the Election Commission did not release an official result and will not until the Court finishes hearing the two pending cases challenging Musharraf's eligibility to seek re-election in uniform.  3.  (SBU)  The unofficial breakdown is as follows for Pervez Musharraf (Pakistan Muslim League), Makhdoom Amin Fahim (Pakistan People's Party), Wajihuddin Ahmed (independent/lawyers' federation) and Faryal Talpor (independent/the sister of Benazir Bhutto's husband). (Please note: the international media is erroneously separating the National Assembly into House and Senate results, although the Assembly and Senate convened today as one body.  Different media sources are reporting slightly different numbers.)  National Assembly:  Musharraf 252; Ahmed 2; voided 3. Punjab Assembly: Musharraf 253; Ahmed 3; voided 1. Sindh Assembly:  Musharraf 102; Ahmed 2; voided 1. Northwest Frontier Province: Musharraf 31; Ahmed 2; voided 2. Balochistan:  Musharraf 33.  4. (SBU)  In the Electoral College, there is a total of 702 possible votes; Musharraf won 345.  Votes in the National Assembly count for one electoral college vote; votes in the provincial assemblies are weighted.  According to the constitution, to win a candidate must only collect the most number of votes cast.  Opposition: Resignations and Abstentions ----------------------------------------  5. (SBU) The media is focusing on the \"empty chamber\" story. About half of the 1,170 legislators who could have voted actually did (Ref B).  With few exceptions, opposition members (including the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N), the six religious parties forming the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA), and most of the smaller nationalist parties) had already resigned from the National and Provincial Assemblies.  The opposition knew it could not affect the outcome, so the resignations were designed to embarrass Musharraf and undercut his legitimacy.  Notably, though, one Awami National Party and three MMA legislators crossed the aisle to vote at the National Assembly.  6.  (C) The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) met the letter, if not the spirit, of its October 5 power sharing agreement with Musharraf.  As agreed with Musharraf, the PPP did not resign and \"abstained\" from the vote.  But the PPP also did not appear in the assemblies for today's voting.  The PPP's local spokesman Farhatullah Babar said that, absent a final Supreme Court decision, the PPP still considers it unconstitutional  ISLAMABAD 00004340  002 OF 002   for Musharraf to run for office in uniform.  The party, therefore, did not want to give Musharraf added credibility by appearing in chambers today.  However, PML General Secretary Mushahid Hussain downplayed the PPP's absence.  He  SIPDIS told A/DCM that PML was satisfied that the PPP had kept their agreement.  7.  (SBU)  Babar said that Bhutto would make an official statement on the election later today but could not confirm when.  PPP candidate Amin Fahim could not legally withdraw his candidacy after yesterday's Musharraf-Bhutto agreement, but he received no votes in the balloting.  Some Clashes in Peshawar and Karachi ------------------------------------  8. (U) Islamabad and Lahore were quiet, and voting was orderly.  There were violent clashes in Peshawar between lawyers and police when the polling representative for Ahmed was apparently denied access to the provincial assembly building to observe the vote.  Police responded with tear gas to protesters burning an effigy of Musharraf.  In Karachi, there was some violence with demonstrators throwing stones at police.  9. (C) Comment:  The October 5 Supreme Court decision to block announcement of an official winner and the opposition walkout robbed Musharraf of an unequivocal win today, but his supporters are nevertheless celebrating.  Bhutto stuck to the letter of her agreement with Musharraf but clearly is hedging her bets until there is a final Supreme Court decision on Musharraf's eligibility.  The Court is not scheduled to take up the cases again until October 17 and could deliberate another two or more weeks after that. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1178|07ISLAMABAD4358", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/9/2007 11:47", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004358  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS:  ELAB ECON EIND ETRD PHUM KTEX SOCI PK SUBJECT:  PAKISTAN EXPORTERS SEEK TO IMPROVE LABOR CONDITIONS WHILE UNIONS STRUGGLE FOR BASIC RIGHTS  REF:  ISLAMABAD 1178  1.  Summary:  While Pakistan has ratified 35 of the International Labor Organization's 185 Conventions on Labor Rights, including all eight core Conventions concerning the most basic worker rights, working conditions are still poor, and the labor movement has a long way to go to become relevant here.  Although the largest civil society group in Pakistan, labor unions lack the capacity to push for more than just basic worker rights.  Interestingly, employers may be the ones to improve working conditions.  A few promising programs are being initiated by progressive employers, primarily exporters, to improve worker rights compliance.  Exporters view enforcement of worker rights as necessary to maintain market share in a competitive international marketplace.  Nike's pullout of Saga Sports in Sialkot is a prime example of this tendency.  End summary.  CONVENTIONS RATIFIED, BUT NO ENFORCEMENT ----------------------------------------  2.  Pakistan has ratified only 35 of the 185 International Labor Organization (ILO) Conventions, including the eight core conventions that contain the rights to organize, to engage in collective bargaining, to equality at work, and the abolition of child and forced labor.  However, the ratification of these Conventions has not secured labor rights for the majority of Pakistan's workers. Enforcement is lacking and inspection regimes are viewed as corrupt.  When unions try to form, organizers are fired from their jobs without recourse.  LEGISLATION NOT HELPING -----------------------  3.  Despite the relatively few conventions ratified, Pakistan's labor legislation is relatively good compared to some of its neighbors.  However, the current trend is toward limiting workers' rights. The Finance Act of 2006, which was passed to establish the federal budget, included language that allowed for a longer working day, no compulsory holiday closures, and eliminated overtime pay for contract workers. In 2002, a new Industrial Relations Ordinance (IRO) was put into place which curbed workers' right to unionize and right to collective bargaining.  Solidarity Center, along with other labor organizations, fear the Draft Employment and Services Bill, which is being finalized in the Ministry of Labor before being sent to the Cabinet for review, will further codify the changes made in the Finance Act.  4.  The provincial governments are also restricting labor rights. The Punjab Industrial Policy eliminated labor inspections and replaced them with a self-declaration system whereby employers themselves certify that they are abiding by all labor rules and regulations.  The province of Sindh joined in banning labor inspections and touted it as a \"pro-business\" move.  Sindh also banned teachers' associations.  This ban was later overturned by the Sindh High Court, but the ban reflects the lack of appetite for protecting labor rights in the provinces.  5.  In addition, the labor inspection regime is notoriously corrupt.  Aleema Khan, Founder of the Pakistan Compliance Initiative (PCI), stated that many inspectors do not even tour the factories they were sent to inspect.  Rather, they meet in closed-door sessions with the factory owners to negotiate the payment for a clean inspection report.  Even employers in compliance must pay or risk receiving an unfavorable report.  (Note:  Pakistan ranks 138 out of 180 countries on Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index.  End Note.)  6.  However, many observers believe that Pakistan has some of the best industrial relations and social welfare laws in South Asia despite recent legislative changes limiting worker rights.  Zahoor Awan, Deputy Secretary General of the Pakistan Workers Federation (PWF) commented the problem is a disconnect between the law and its enforcement.  Inspections are infrequent (if at all) and fines, if imposed, are usually minimal.  Awan's view is that the cost of compliance is often greater than the cost of paying fines for a labor law violation.  SOME IN GOP ALSO CONCERNED --------------------------  7.  Dr. Sabur Ghayur, Chair of the Policy Planning Cell in the Ministry of Labor, Manpower and Overseas Pakistanis, is working on  ISLAMABAD 00004358  002 OF 003   policies addressing some of these issues.  He explained that the current system of labor laws and inspections is inefficient, mismanaged and corrupt.  There are numerous complicated and redundant laws that need to be simplified.  He wants to narrow it down to about five to six laws and anticipates an 18 month timeframe for this process.  Ghayur understands the need for Pakistan's labor laws to be in line with ILO standards in order for Pakistan to remain competitive in the world of global outsourcing and that transparent enforcement of the law is of utmost importance.  He also commented on how the U.S. had previously assisted on policy design back in the 1980s and early 1990s and suggested such assistance would be helpful again.  CURRENT STATUS OF LABOR MOVEMENT IN PAKISTAN --------------------------------------------  8.  According to Greg Schulze, Country Director for the Solidarity Center in Islamabad, just under two million workers, or about three percent of the work force, belong to a union, compared to eight percent of the private sector work force in the U.S.  Union workers tend to be better educated than non-union workers.  While non-union laborers tend to be largely illiterate, 60 percent of union workers can read and write, however they still lack the training needed to organize effectively.  There is very little professional capacity, with unions having one strong leader, but no lower-level personnel to follow through with initiatives, or to groom for future leadership roles.  9.  Union workers in Pakistan fall into two categories - those who fall under collective bargaining agreements and those who do not.  A growing number of them do not fall under an agreement.  Before employees can vote on whether or not to unionize, the union organizers at the place of employment must register with the National Labor Relations Council (NLRC).  Once they register, the NLRC often contacts the place of employment to notify the owners of the union's plans.  The organizers are then fired before a vote can be called.  Under current law, there is no recourse for the fired employees.  10.  To date, unions have focused on enforcing existing rights and have avoided political action.  The majority of factories do not follow the law, and with the corrupt inspection system (or self-validation as in Punjab), there is no need to. The stronger unions have been able to ensure minimum wage payments and limited the number of working hours, but have not had the ability to push for better working conditions not already mandated by law.  11. There have been a few signs of increased political activities. The Jamaat-e-Islami (JI), a conservative religious party, attempted to take over one of the largest unions in the country at the Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA).  The Pakistan Muslim League (PML) attempted its own take over of WAPDA.  Both were unsuccessful.   12.  The Solidarity Center is also working to strengthen female participation and leadership in unions.  More women are entering the work force.  The labor force participation rate for women has increased from 13.7 percent in 2000 to 18.9 percent in 2006 (the last year for which statistics are available), and that growth is in the industrial and trade sectors, not agriculture.  EXPORTERS SEE NEED FOR A CHANGE -------------------------------  13.  Although unions are struggling to improve working conditions, two business-led initiatives are gaining momentum in changing how employers view labor rights.  One is Workers Employers Bilateral Council of Pakistan (WEBCOP), established in 2000 by employers and labor leaders to promote cooperation, trust and confidence between workers and employers with a view to accelerate industrial development and social progress through decent work.  WEBCOP provides a bi-partite institution framework for voluntary mediation, conciliation and arbitration of industrial disputes. Currently, WEBCOP is approaching various Chambers of Commerce in order to reach employers to show them that labor rights are not a cost but a benefit to business.  Its philosophy is that better treatment of workers leads to greater productivity, which in turn leads to greater competitiveness.  14.  The second business-led initiative is the Pakistan Compliance Initiative (PCI).  Its mission is to generate a competitive advantage for Pakistani exporters by promoting a transparent system  ISLAMABAD 00004358  003 OF 003   of verified compliance with recognized ethical business standards with active support of government and civil society.  Essentially, PCI is promoting corporate social responsibility and supply chain integrity for Pakistan's largest export industry - textiles.  15.  Both of the above initiatives have been spurred further by the Nike pullout from Saga Sports in Sialkot (reftel).  Nike inspectors at the Saga Sports manufacturing center noted late wages, unregistered workers, and homework, which cannot be monitored or regulated.  Nike tried negotiations, but believed it could not work with Saga and terminated the contract.  This was a wake-up call for employers around Pakistan who provide manufacturing for international brands:  child labor was not the only concern for these buyers - workers' rights were, too.  16.   Previously, manufacturers believed child labor was the only concern of international brands.  In 1999, Sialkot, the center of the soccer ball manufacturing industry, worked with ILO, UNICEF and Save the Children, UK in creating the Independent Monitoring Against Child Labor (IMAC) organization.  IMAC was responsible for inspecting soccer ball manufactures for possible child labor violations.  Saga Sports received a clean bill of health on this front. Nike's pullout prompted ILO to hold a tri-partite conference on the issue of worker rights, which changed IMAC's mandate and prompted the Sialkot Chamber of Commerce to work to make Sialkot a Center of Excellence in Manufacturing based on worker rights compliance.  COMMENT -------  17.  While labor conditions in Pakistan are still poor, and improving worker rights is low on the political agenda, labor unions are still Pakistan's largest civil society group.  They need to be strengthened and trained on organizing and managing effectively. Post has designed an International Visitors Program bringing together labor, management and government to show how all three can work together to promote better labor standards.  In addition, efforts by ILO and Solidarity Center need to be supported.  18.  There are other bright spots on the horizon as well.  After the Nike pullout from Saga Sports in Sialkot, export-driven manufacturers saw a need for a change in labor relations.  Post believes it is important to take advantage of this paradigm shift. As part of this, Pakistan needs to focus on worker rights and training in order to increase its competitiveness an outsourcing center for international brands.  Funding for initiatives such as WEBCOP and PCI are an important way to support improved labor conditions. End Comment.  Patterson " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3476|07PESHAWAR559", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/9/2007 12:35", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ISLAMABAD 004363  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, MASS, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: FATA PLAN IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE: OCTOBER 8, 2007  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 3476      B. PESHAWAR 559  1. (SBU) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUESTS:  Implementation of the Mission's strategy in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) is moving ahead despite challenges.  We received our fiscal year 2007 (FY07) funding for the FATA by September 30.  With our prodding, the donor community is taking steps to improve coordination of assistance to the border areas.  We are also engaging the Pakistani government on several levels to get buy-in for the U.S. Government's approach to supporting Pakistan's FATA plan.  We continue to urge the government to appoint a Pakistani \"FATA czar\" who can cut through the bureaucracy.  2. (SBU) Post has three urgent action requests: 1) Funding for a temporary FATA Coordinator until a permanent position can be established.  We have identified a WAE, who would also coordinate border projects until a more permanent coordination mechanism can be found.  2) Immediate release of renewed funding (which lapsed in March 2007) for cost-effective, cross-border Pashto language radio programs that have been successful.  A robust information campaign is going to be key to any counterinsurgency strategy in the FATA.  3) To carry this out, we would welcome the assignment of a Military Information Support Team to the embassy, which we understand is under consideration. (See paras 12, 15 and 16 for action requests.) END SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUESTS.  ---------------------------------------- USAID Signs FATA Agreement with Pakistan ----------------------------------------  3. (SBU) USAID's Mission Director signed the FATA agreement with the Government of Pakistan's Economic Affairs Division on September 30, 2007.  The Pakistani side had delayed the signing to seek U.S. assistance in the form of a cash transfer rather than through USAID-implemented projects.  As the September 30 deadline neared, Ambassador and USAID underscored that this issue was non-negotiable.  Pakistan eventually signed the agreement without any changes to our project-based structure.  The agreement provides $73 million of new money for USAID's new programs in the FATA.  4. (SBU) Representatives from USAID's Office of Transition Initiatives (OTI) returned to Pakistan the week of September 23 to begin setting up OTI's program to strengthen community and government relations in the FATA.  The program's implementers should arrive by mid-November and this effort should begin full operations by January 2008.  5. (SBU) Preparation is also underway on USAID's Livelihood Development Program, whose initial goal is to generate employment and develop skills for young men in the Tribal Areas.  \"Livelihoods\" is designed to create better alternatives for those who would otherwise be susceptible to recruitment by extremists.  USAID sent out its request for applications (RFAs) for this $300 million program in mid-September.  USAID expects to receive proposals by November 2 and implementing partners selected in January 2008.  6. (SBU) USAID has received proposals for the Capacity Building Program for the FATA Secretariat and FATA Development Authority.  The selection committee has met and is reviewing proposals.  USAID expects to sign a contract with the winning partner by late December, with implementation beginning in January 2008.  ------------------ Donor Coordination ------------------  7. (SBU) The Ambassador met October 3 with Dutch Ambassador Willem Andreae to discuss donor coordination for FATA development.  Andreae agreed to take the lead coordinating role on behalf of the larger donors to the border areas.  ISLAMABAD 00004363  002 OF 004   Post has already been meeting with donors.  We do not believe the current leadership of UNDP is capable of assuming the traditional coordinating role among donors.  8. (SBU) USAID Deputy Director met October 3 with development assistance counterparts from other donors in Pakistan.  He presented USAID's portion of the Mission's FATA strategy and learned more about others' assistance plans.  Canada is contributing C$12 million to the FATA, primarily through the World Food Program.  The UK's Department for International Development (DFID) is directing approximately US$1 million to support the FATA Secretariat.  But for the most part, other donors are looking to the U.S. to lead in the FATA while they focus their own efforts along the rest of the Pak-Afghan border (i.e., Baluchistan, Northern Areas).  The EU Commission, for instance, is reluctant to work in the FATA because it believes projects cannot be properly monitored.  ---------------------------------------- Coordination with Government of Pakistan ----------------------------------------  9. (SBU) Acting DCM and USAID Mission Director briefed the Mission's FATA strategy on September 19 to the Economic Affairs Division (EAD) of the Finance Ministry.  EAD is responsible for coordinating foreign aid to Pakistan and signs the government's assistance agreements.  Our briefing made clear that EAD, like the rest of the Pakistani government, has not fully grasped the full extent of the U.S. Government's assistance plan for the Tribal Areas, which comprises development, security, political, and infrastructure elements.  Peshawar PO and USAID representative provided a similar briefing to the FATA Secretariat on September 22.  The discussion highlighted the  SIPDIS importance of persistent coordination and transparency at the field level.  We will continue to give detailed briefs to EAD and other federal and provincial entities on each aspect of our plan.  10. (SBU) Our interactions with the government also revealed bureaucratic confusion and disputes over the FATA plan. Despite EAD's lead role, the Ministry of States and Frontier Regions (SAFRON) wants to be involved in coordinating all donor assistance to the Tribal Areas.  Consulate Peshawar has faced numerous roadblocks from SAFRON in setting up an interim Levy Training Center, which should have been a straightforward project.  Ref B highlights the overlapping authorities and complexity of the FATA's political administration.  We will need to be resilient in managing the patchwork of government entities who want a hand in the FATA plan's implementation.  ------------------------ FATA Strategy Leadership ------------------------  11. (SBU) Now that the presidential election is over, post will re-engage with the President and Prime Minister on appointing a Pakistani \"FATA czar,\" someone who has the stature needed to overcome the government's bureaucratic hurdles.  Without such a person, the FATA strategy risks stalling on the Pakistani side due to red tape.  Retiring Vice Chief of Army Staff Ahsan Hyat would certainly fit the bill, but we believe there are alternatives.  Post has engaged the government on this issue and will continue to raise it at the highest levels after Pakistan's presidential election.  12. (SBU) Post is urgently seeking Washington approval to hire a \"FATA coordinator\" to oversee our interagency FATA strategy (septel).  This is a critical need, so while the position is being created, we are working closely with the Department to assign an officer to serve as interim FATA coordinator and have indentified a WAE to fill this position.  This position will not interfere with program implementation of individual sections/agencies, but we need a single officer  ISLAMABAD 00004363  003 OF 004   to manage this initiative.  He/she can also oversee, at least temporarily, some of the border projects.  ---------------- Public Diplomacy ----------------  13. (SBU) Conducting an effective public diplomacy campaign is particularly difficult in the FATA, where residents are instinctively suspicious of government programs -- more so when such programs bear the U.S. government's imprint.  The government of Pakistan is fully aware of this challenge, as are we.  Post has developed a public diplomacy strategy that calls for advising and enhancing the Pakistani government's outreach to FATA residents.  14. (SBU) Tribal leaders told Ambassador during her recent trip to Peshawar that there were not enough information programs in their areas and there was no effort to counter extremist voices.  Why, one tribal leader asked, did we not help amplify statements by leading Muslim clerics that suicide bombings were not Islamic?  15. (SBU) Since 2004, we have supported Pashto-language radio programming that is highly effective in getting moderate viewpoints out to the public on both sides of the Pak-Afghan border, and we want to continue that support.  The project's initial funding came from SCA/RA, with USAID managing the program.  Grant funding lapsed in March 2007, although the project director continues to produce two programs: \"On the Borderline\" and \"Religion and the World.\"  The Office of the Undersecretary for Public Affairs and Public Diplomacy (R) has notified us that it would fund $140,000 for \"Religion in the World\" by October 29.  (Note: In March 2007, post originally requested $450,000 for both programs.  End note.) The U.S. Government must preserve and augment funding for this type of media outreach -- a small investment that earns us a tremendous return.  Post requests the Department immediately release $140,000 to ensure continued outreach to Pashto-speaking audiences.  16. (SBU) Post is aware of consideration of a proposal to send a Military Information Support Team (MIST) to the area. We would welcome this additional resource to augment our information outreach.  ------------------------- Frontier Corps Assistance -------------------------  17. (SBU) Strengthening the Frontier Corps, Pakistan's first line of defense on the Afghan border, is an important piece of the U.S. assistance plan.  The Frontier Corps has a historical and locally accepted presence on the border, whereas the Pakistani Army has traditionally stayed out of the FATA.  The Office of the Defense Representative to Pakistan (ODRP) has obligated $29.4 million of its $39.4 million of FY07 Department of Defense Counternarcotics funding.  This will fund an expansion of the Frontier Corps, a new Frontier Corps training center, Border Surveillance Centers (BSCs), special operations training for air crews, communications gear, and FLIR night observation devices.  The contractor is now refining design plans for the training center and the BSCs in consultation with ODRP and CJTF-82. In the meantime, RAO medics may be able to provide some emergency training to Frontier Corps medics, as Frontier Corps units are reluctant to fight because there is limited care and increased combat.  18. (SBU) DEA is beginning to engage with the Frontier Corps.  DEA conducted a 3-day drug enforcement training course with the Frontier Corps (Northwest Frontier Province) in mid-September.  A training session on clandestine drug labs is planned for November.  During DEA Administrator Karen Tandy's late-September visit to Islamabad, she discussed with Interior Minister Sherpao further DEA cooperation with the  ISLAMABAD 00004363  004 OF 004   Frontier Corps.  19. (SBU) In recent meetings, senior Pakistani officials have incorrectly claimed that the U.S., for all its talk of helping the Frontier Corps, has not yet provided material support.  In fact, the embassy's Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) has provided the Frontier Corps more than $31 million worth of lifesaving equipment, communications gear, and other essential items over the past five years, with another $8 million in the pipeline.  Ambassador wrote to Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan on September 24 with these details to set  SIPDIS the record straight.  Khan replied quickly that he would disseminate this information within the Pakistani government.  NAS also is providing another $2 million in commodity support for the Frontier Constabulary, which interdicts in the Tribal Areas' interior suspected terrorists and traffickers who make it past the Frontier Corps.  Both organizations are suffering high casualty rates (septel).  ----------------- Visit by GAO Team -----------------  20. (SBU) A four-person GAO team visited September 23-28 to review U.S. assistance to Pakistan/Afghan border areas. Their schedule included a full slate of Embassy briefings, meetings with Pakistani officials, and discussions with other donors to the FATA.  The team also traveled to Peshawar for briefings at the Consulate, a helicopter tour of the border (including an aerial view of the new Frontier Corps training facility and a border security road constructed by NAS), and meetings with government officials there.  We will continue to respond to their requests via the Department's GAO liaison.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4309", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/10/2007 12:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004382  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2017 TAGS: PGOV, CVIS, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO SEEKS TO CLAIM NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SEAT  REF: ISLAMABAD 4309  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Summary: Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto has renewed her suit for a National Assembly seat after the National Reconciliation Ordinance voided all corruption charges and convictions against her.  The GOP, for its part, continues to fulfill its side of the Musharraf-Bhutto \"deal,\" by requesting that InterPol cancel notices on Bhutto and her husband.  End summary.  Bhutto Asks for Seat  2. (U) Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto renewed October 8 her 2002 petition to the Sindh High Court, asking it to award her the National Assembly seat originally reserved for her in the 2002 general elections.  PPP legal counsel Farooq Naek argued to the provincial court that the October 5 National Reconciliation Ordinance (NRO) withdraws all corruption cases against Bhutto and actually voids her conviction under another executive ordinance.  The conviction had barred her from serving in the legislature.  In 2002, Bhutto was at the top of the PPP's list as a candidate for one of the 40 National Assembly seats reserved for women.  InterPol Notified to Withdraw Notices  3. (U) Meanwhile, the GOP has withdrawn the \"red notices\" with InterPol issued against Bhutto and her husband Asif Ali Zardari.  Interior Ministry spokesperson Javed Iqbal Cheema stated, \"Whatever the government requires to fulfill the norms of reconciliation will be done.\"  4. (C) Comment: Bhutto's legal move should be viewed as a preamble to her scheduled October 18 return when she will resume hands-on control of Pakistan People's Party activities.  It will also re-establish her presence in the National Assembly, where she ultimately needs to build support for a constitutional amendment that allows her to potentially serve another term as prime minister.   End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/12/2007 13:49", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004421  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS:  EAID, KSCA, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN SERIOUS ABOUT POLIO ERADICATION  REF:  State 135139  1.  (SBU)  Economic Counselor and Economic Specialist met with Ministry of Health (MOH) Director General  Lieutenant General (retired) Shahida Malik to deliver reftel demarche October 11.  MOH Polio Country Coordinating officer Dr. Rehan Hafiz also attended the meeting.  The Minister of Health is out of the country.  2.  (SBU)  Hafiz told Embassy officers that the GOP has documented 16 cases of polio this year, compared to 39 reported cases in 2006. He hopes that the total number of cases will not exceed 20 for 2007.  The GOP is targeting 97% of an estimated 33 million children nationwide.  Growing security concerns make reaching out to remote areas in the border areas challenging, but Malik commented that the GOP is determined to eradicate polio. Hafiz remarked that once they reach the children, the vaccine is not refused for religious reasons.  3.  (SBU)  All border crossings with Afghanistan now have capture points where children ages 5 or under are administered oral vaccines.  Hafiz did not have any statistics on percentage of children vaccinated in the border areas. The GOP is working with its Afghan counterparts to conduct National Vaccination Programs on the same dates to ensure maximum coverage. Dr. Hafiz said that the GoP now has a vaccine that contains polio types 1,2,3 as well as isolated vaccines. In case of a positive identification, they go back and revaccinate with isolated vaccine, which is more effective.   4.  (SBU)  The GOP receives funding for polio eradication from the USAID, DFID, the Japanese Government, and the World Bank.  He said that the GOP needs funding beyond Feb. 2008.  Pakistan Development partners are meeting November 1 to discuss future funding.  5.  (SBU)  USAID Pakistan is beginning to implement a one-year $475,000 program in the Federally Administered Tribal Agencies along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border to strengthen social mobilization for polio eradication and increase cross-border activities.  One key component is increasing the number of cross border immunization posts and to ensure coordinated mobilization activities between Pakistan and Afghanistan.  The socialization mobilization component could include Jirgas, capacity building for local journalists to cover health issues, and outreach activities targeting religious leaders and parents.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/12/2007 14:00", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004422  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: MOORE MEETINGS FOCUS ON ROZS, IPR, TRANSIT TRADE   Summary - - - - - - -  1.  (SBU)  On the margins of the October 12-13 Strategic Dialogue in Islamabad, Bureau of Economic and Energy Affairs Deputy Assistant Secretary Chris Moore met with senior Ministry of Commerce, Finance  SIPDIS and Industries to share details of the Reconstruction Opportunity Zone (ROZ) legislation and to encourage the GOP to start development of incentive and other programs to attract investment to the ROZs. Our GOP interlocutors took this advice on board and mentioned that they were planning a road show with potential investors to Washington in the near future.  The Minister of Commerce pushed for inclusion of all of Balochistan in the ROZ legislation, as well as inclusion of categories 347 and 348.  On intellectual property rights protection, Moore met with the Chairman of the Intellectual Property Office, highlighting the need for the GOP to fulfill its promises on enacting data protection legislation and complimenting the GOP on its progress on enforcement.  End summary.  2.  (SBU)   Bureau of Economic and Energy Affairs Deputy Assistant Secretary Chris Moore met with State Finance Minister Omer Ayub;  SIPDIS Secretary Ministry of Industries Shahab Khwaja; Minister of Commerce  SIPDIS Humayum Akhtar Khan; Ashraf Hayat, Additional Secretary Ministry of Commerce, and Chairman, Intellectual Property Office (IPO) Yasin Tahir.  The majority of  meetings focused on briefing the GOP interlocutors on the status and details of the ROZ legislation and asking our GOP interlocutors on their plans for implementation and incentives.  Pakistan's recently issued anti-money laundering ordinance was discussed at the Finance Ministry. At IPO, Moore urged prompt passage of TRIPS-compliant data protection legislation and complimented the GOP on its enforcement activities.  Ministry of Finance:  Competitiveness and AML - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  3.  (SBU)  At the Ministry of Finance, State Finance Minister Omer Ayub highlighted the GOP's push on increasing the competitiveness of Pakistani firms in the international marketplace, noting USAID's assistance.  He also noted GOP efforts opening trade routes to Central Asia.  Regarding incentives, Ayub commented that they need to make sense economically and highlighted GOP efforts for the motorcycle and gems and jewelry sectors.  Moore emphasized that the GOP needs to start looking now at possible ROZ locations, infrastructure, and put together a package of incentives to attract investors.  4.  (SBU)  Moore asked Ayub about the September 8 Anti-Money Laundering (AML) ordinance signed by President Musharraf.  Ayub commented that the ordinance is identical to the bill before the National Assembly and that legislative process is still in train. He added that \"reputational issues\" prompted Musharraf to sign the ordinance.  He also argued that the Financial Intelligence Unit meets the Financial Action Task Force criteria for independence. Ayub was confident that the ordinance would be systematically renewed every four months.  Ministry of Industries:  Looking beyond textiles; need to find skilled labor - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  5.  (SBU)  Moore briefed Shahab Khwaja, Secretary, Ministry of Industries, on the provisions of the ROZ legislation and asked Khwaja on his Ministry's implementation and industry recruitment efforts.  Khwaja was particularly interested in attracting non-textile sectors (marble and granite, gems and jewelry and surgical instruments) to the ROZs.  He added that the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) Secretariat had already established a marble zone.  The major problem, however, is the lack of skilled manpower as people will not relocate to this region for jobs.  Moore commented that training is an important part of the U.S. FATA program.  He agreed that looking beyond textiles is important, but highlighted that a good incentive structure is essential to attract investors.  Comment:  It was clear that the GOP has not given much thought on what types of incentives are likely to attract investors to the ROZs.  End comment.   ISLAMABAD 00004422  002 OF 003   6.  (SBU)  Ihsan Ullah Khan, ??? of the Pakistan Stone Development Company also attended the meeting.  (Note:  Assistant Secretary Sullivan met with Khan in xxx during his trip to the FATA. End note.)  Khan described his successful visit to the U.S. to sell his marble and granite; informed us that the establishment of \"marble cities\" in the FATA is well underway; and outlined his efforts on training women for mosaics and handicrafts.  Commerce Minister Khan:  another push to add 347, 348 and Balochistan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  7. (SBU)  Khan was pleased to hear that the ROZ legislation would be submitted to Congress very soon, and asked about the timeframe for passage.  He also made a push for inclusion of categories 347 and 348 (cotton trousers) and the entire province of Balochistan.  Moore responded that formulation of the legislation required close consultations and a balance between broad coverage and what Congress will actually pass.  He highlighted the single transformation, generous coverage and long duration.  Khan asked if he could pursue this issue on the Hill; Moore commented that it will be challenging but the GOP and Levis can try.  Khan commented that he did not want to jeopardize quick passage but inclusion of 347 and 348 would help Pakistan a lot.  On Balochistan, the GOP wants to give the province the same treatment as North West Frontier Province, given the similar levels of development.  Khan closed by expressing the GOP's full support for the ROZ legislation.  Incentives key to ROZ development - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  8.  (SBU)  Moore and Economic Counselor discussed ROZ implementation with Javed Saifullah Khan, Chairman of the SAIF Group, one of Pakistan's biggest conglomerates.  SAIF Group has successfully invested in the Egyptian QIZs and Khan was very helpful in organizing appointments for the ROZ study group in xxxx.  His family is from the North West Frontier Province and has textile mills there.  Khan highlighted that a long-term, attractive incentive structure and access to finance will be key to attracting industry to the ROZs.  He emphasized that duty-free treatment was not sufficient for the textile sector since transportation and energy costs in the ROZ-designated areas will not necessarily be competitive with the Egyptian and Jordanian QIZs.  Transit Trade:  Pakistan sees no problems - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  9.  (SBU)  Junaid Iqbal Ch., Additional Secretary, Ministry of Economic Affairs, gave Moore and Economic Counselor an update on transit trade and GOP FATA developments plans.  Iqbal chairs the Pakistan-Afghanistan Joint Working Group which handles transit trade issues.  He highlighted the need for safe transit through Afghanistan to implement the National Trade Corridor Strategy linking Pakistan to Central Asia.  In response to our question, Iqbal did not see any problems with the status quo with Afghan transit trade through Pakistan beyond the smuggling issues.  The GOP had removed cooking oil from the list of prohibited transit trade items; the GOP is considering the Afghan request to remove cigarettes and automotive spare parts.  (Comment:  Cigarettes and spare parts, along with electronics, are among the items with the highest incidence of smuggling back to Pakistan.  End comment) Moore highlighted the importance of smooth transit trade for the success of ROZs on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistan border and to the revival of the Afghan private sector since the ROZs will be export-oriented.  11.  (SBU)  On renegotiation of the Pakistan-Afghan transit trade treaty, Iqbal told us that Special Advisor to the Prime Minister (and de facto Finance Minister) Salman Shah would chair a meeting this year to review the status of the treaty.  In response to our question, he explained that bilateral trade had decreased because of a decrease in fuel oil imports and a slowdown in the Afghan construction sector.  He expressed concern, however, that development of Iranian ports may make that option more attractive for Afghanistan.  Pakistan provides 300 million dollars in development assistance to Afghanistan, focused on roads, medical  ISLAMABAD 00004422  003 OF 003   facilities and scholarship for 1000 Afghan students to Pakistani universities.  10.  (SBU)   Iqbal also reviewed Pakistan's plans for FATA development.  He stressed the importance of developing infrastructure quickly and noted the 250 million funding deficit. Moore commented that he is following up with G8 members on their commitments made at the June German G8 summit on development of the Pakistan-Afghan border areas.  Intellectual Property Organization:  push for data protection - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  11. (SBU)  Pakistan's Intellectual Property Organization (IPO) Secretary Yasin Tahir made a long presentation detailing his  SIPDIS organization's achievement since its 2005 creation.  In a discussion of Pakistan's Special 301 out-of-cycle review, Moore emphasized the need for Pakistan to enact TRIPS-compliant data protection legislation as quickly as possible.  Keying off Yelsin's point that IPR protection is important for innovation, Moore highlighted the importance of data protection for development of Pakistan life sciences sector.  In a reversal of his position at previous meetings, Tahir recognized his organization's responsibility for assisting in this effort.  While recognizing the TRIPS obligation and appreciating the decision to remove Pakistan from the priority watch list, Tahir accused the U.S. of making additional demands for IPR protection.  He commented that while data protection is a TRIPS commitment, data exclusivity must be negotiated bilaterally.  Tahir also made a push for more training and asked that international training participation requests for all areas touching on IPR be made through his office.  12.  (U)  DAS Moore did not have an opportunity to clear this cable. " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4337|07ISLAMABAD4382", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/14/2007 10:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004426  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: NATIONAL RECONCILIATION ORDINANCE FACES SUPREME COURT SCRUTINY  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4337      B. ISLAMABAD 4382  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan's Supreme Court again weighed into the political fray, accepting six opposition petitions against Musharraf's October 5 National Reconciliation Ordinance.  While the Court will not take up the unified case for weeks, its initial October 12 decision to hear the case halted all other related actions by lower courts and the National Accountability Bureau.  Petitioners will argue that the Ordinance discriminates in favor of politicians and bureaucrats.  Implications for Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto are uncertain.  Musharraf has urged her to stay away until this and his own court cases are settled, but Pakistan Muslim League leaders have privately assured Embassy that Bhutto will not face arrest if she returns on October 18, which Bhutto still plans to do.  End summary.  ------------------------------------ Court's Chilling Effect on Ordinance ------------------------------------  2. (U) A three-judge Supreme Court panel, led by activist Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, decided October 12 to hear five petitions against Musharraf's October 5 National Reconciliation Ordinance.  The Ordinance was supposed to dismiss charges and void convictions for corruption brought from 1986 to 1999 against politicians and civil servants, including Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto (Ref A).  3. (C) The Court has deferred final judgment on the Ordinance's constitutionality to early November.  It warned Bhutto and other beneficiaries of the Ordinance not to count on having charges/convictions dropped.  Consequently, lower courts have been ordered to halt any actions based on the Ordinance.  Similarly, contacts within Pakistan's National Accountability Board (NAB) also told PolOff October 11 that \"pulling of cases,\" i.e., physically identifying the files of those cases intended to be closed under the Ordinance, was suspended indefinitely.  ---------------------- Yet Another Court Case ----------------------  4. (U) There appear to be up to six opposition petitioners that will be joined in the one hearing -- Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) chief Qazi Hussain Ahmed, Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) President Shahbaz Sharif, former PPP member Mubashar Hasan, Insaf Welfare Trust Chairman Aslam Khaki, and two private citizens, former bureaucrat Roidad Khan and attorney Tariq Assad.  5. (U) The petitioners will argue that each has been denied a fundamental right under Pakistan's Constitution and that the ordinance is discriminatory as it extends amnesty only to politicians or civil servants.  Petitioners are also expected to argue that Musharraf can only pardon those already convicted by the courts, but is not constitutionally empowered to withdraw cases still pending with the courts.  6. (C) The Supreme Court has already notified Pakistan's Attorney General and NAB, as well as three friends of the court, to prepare to argue the merits of the six petitions. Court watchers are expecting a much expanded bench to hear the substance of the case.  Whomever is chosen to be presiding justice appears to be key in the Ordinance's final fate.  --------------------------- Public vs. Private Reaction ---------------------------  7. (U) Commenting to the press gaggle outside the Supreme Court October 12, Attorney General Malik Mohammad Qayyum stated that Bhutto was still welcome to return to Karachi on October 18, though she would not be able to claim amnesty  ISLAMABAD 00004426  002 OF 002   until the Court ruled.  8. (C) Later October 12, however, Qayyum privately told A/DCM that he believed the Ordinance was unconstitutional and would be struck down.  Qayyum reiterated Musharraf's October 11 call for Bhutto to postpone her return until after the Court decides both his own case and this case on the National Reconciliation Ordinance.  9. (C) In an October 13 meeting, ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) General Secretary Mushahid Hussein assured A/DCM that Bhutto would not face jail time if she returned, no matter the legal uncertainty created by the Supreme Court. He pointed out that Musharraf still retained the constitutional right to pardon convictions and noted that, regarding pending charges, the cases have been stalled for years.  10. (C) Hussein also suggested Bhutto should postpone her return, not because of any court case but because of a perceived Musharraf-Bhutto understanding earlier in the summer that she would not return until after parliamentary elections.  Hussein worried that Bhutto's return would precipitate another attempt by PML-N's leader Nawaz Sharif to return from exile.  Hussein held out the possibility that Musharraf and other PML leaders might accept Sharif's return, but only after the general elections.  ----------------------------- Benazir Will Not Change Plans -----------------------------  11. (U) Speaking to the press October 12, Bhutto's attorney Senator Babar Awan stated that the PPP leader would definitely return to Karachi on October 18.  Bhutto herself committed to the same on October 11, responding to Musharraf's remarks the evening before on live TV that Bhutto should re-think her plans.  12. (C) Other PPP contacts relayed to PolOffs October 11 that Bhutto, meeting in Dubai with close confidants, had seriously considered Musharraf's request, but had been talked out of it because party members and contributors had already invested considerable amounts to ensure an impressive welcome.  PPP contacts are predicting 400,000 to 500,000 supporters will show up in Karachi on October 18.  Bhutto's inner circle reportedly warned her of a lackluster turnout if the date were moved because party workers and the general public would feel betrayed.  13. (C) Comment: GOP and PML officials are increasingly concerned about the degree to which Chaudhry's Supreme Court will upset the delicate political bargain that led to Musharraf's quiet October 6 re-election and paved the way for Bhutto's planned October 18 return.  Most analysts believe the Court will rule in Musharraf's favor, but the verdict will be close.  Even if the Court strikes down all or part of the National Reconciliation Order, the ruling PML party appears resolved to abide by its agreement to enable Bhutto's return.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/17/2007 11:07", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004439  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: CASC, PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: AMCITS SHOULD AVOID KARACHI OCTOBER 18  1. (SBU) Expecting up to a half million people to turn out for the October 18 arrival in Karachi of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto, the U.S. Consulate in Karachi has issued the below Demonstration Notice (para 2). Bhutto's arrival party alone will be in the hundreds, including an estimated 150 international and local journalists/reporters.  About 3,500 police and troops are being called out to control the crowd and provide security for Bhutto, who has received death threats from radical Islamists.  For security reasons, the government plans to jam cellphones, at least along the route.  The U.S. Consulate in Karachi will be on minimal staffing for the day.  We are concerned about the large numbers of American citizens who may be traveling with her and could well get caught up in demonstrations.  These include both press and some private citizens.  2. (U) Quote: Demonstration Notice.  The media reports that Ms. Benazir Bhutto is scheduled to arrive at the Karachi airport on Thursday, October 18, 2007.  To receive Ms. Bhutto, large crowds are expected to gather at the airport, surrounding routes, the areas around Mazar-e-Quaid (Jinnah's tomb) and all major roads leading to Clifton.  American citizens may wish to avoid the airport area, Shahra-e-Faisal and major roads leading to the airport as well as roads in and around her party headquarters, as road closures and severe traffic congestion are expected.  End quote.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4439", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/18/2007 13:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004472  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/18/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO'S HOMECOMING  REF: ISLAMABAD 4439  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: After over eight years in self-imposed exile, Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto returned to Karachi October 18.  Hundreds of thousands greeted her at the airport, while thousands of security personnel guarded her against terrorist assassination threats.  Bhutto returns to a very different Pakistan than the one she left.  Today, many members of her party and the much expanded private media are criticizing her deal with Musharraf.  An emboldened Supreme Court has stayed implementation of the National Reconciliation Ordinance, the core of her deal with Musharraf, which granted her amnesty from corruption charges.  She faces a tough parliamentary elections fight to win the right to serve again as Prime Minister.  Still, her party has more political legitimacy than any other party in Pakistan. Today she is basking in the applause of her supporters.  End summary.  A Well-Oiled Machine --------------------  2. (U) Dressed in Islamic green and holding prayer beads, a tearful Benazir Bhutto returned to Karachi October 18 accompanied by party loyalists and 150 journalists.  She told reporters that her goals were to restore democracy, eradicate poverty and fight terrorism.  The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) turned out over 500,000--some reports suggest up to 2 million--supporters for her arrival.  Hundreds of thousands of devotees lined her route from Karachi's international airport to the mausoleum of Pakistan's founder, Ali Jinnah. Tens of thousands more, bused in from her power base in Sindh, plus Balochistan and parts of the southern Punjab, patiently waited to see her pass by in an armored truck somewhat reminiscent of the pope-mobile.  It was expected that her journey from the airport to the mausoleum and then to her family home would take 12 hours; Pakistani television continues live coverage of the event. 3. (SBU) Bhutto's next stop is scheduled to be her ancestral town of Larkana in Sindh Province.  Larkana is where Bhutto's father, former Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, was entombed after being executed in 1979 by then President Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq.  She is expected to stay in Larkana for up to 10 days.  The PPP is debating Bhutto's next steps. These could include a road trip from Karachi to Lahore, or a flight to Islamabad and then a road trip to Lahore and the southern Punjab.  The road trip would attempt to replicate the crowds that appeared for the Chief Justice earlier this year when he toured Pakistan after having been suspended by Musharraf.  4. (C) President Musharraf publicly requested that Bhutto abide by her agreement not to return before the January parliamentary elections.  His Pakistan Muslim League (PML) party is concerned that Bhutto's return will prompt Saudi Arabia to allow recently re-deported former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif also to return and leach votes from the PML. An ambivalent PML also knows that Bhutto represents both Musharraf's negotiating partner and their biggest political rival.  \"There is no way to protect her\" -------------------------------  5. (C) PPP supporters are concerned that \"there is no way to protect her,\" but Bhutto nevertheless stood on top of her bulletproof truck to address the crowds.  \"There are intelligence reports that three different groups have plans to carry out attacks on Bhutto,\" stated Sindh Home Secretary Ghulam Mohammad Mohtaram.  Two groups have been described as Pakistani jihadi groups with links to al Qaeda, and the third is Baitullah Mehsud's Taliban group, already responsible for holding 200-300 Pakistani soldiers hostage in Waziristan.  6. (C) Musharraf has assured the PPP that Bhutto will receive adequate security protection.  Members of the government have been at pains to explain to Embassy officials that the GOP has done everything possible to provide for her security.  To protect her, some 3,500 police and troops manned her route and rally.  Additional specialized units, e.g., bomb disposal  ISLAMABAD 00004472  002 OF 002   squads, monitored the scene and stood by ready to react.  GOP interlocutors claimed that nearly 20,000 personnel were engaged in order to ensure Bhutto's safety.  Officials also assured that cell phone coverage along the route would be shut down, bullet proof vehicles would be provided, and a helicopter might even be at her disposal to be able to by-pass the mega-city's most dangerous chokepoints.  Not the Same Pakistan ---------------------  7. (C) This is a different Pakistan than the one Bhutto left.  The private media is larger and no longer shy about airing criticisms of Bhutto, and the Supreme Court is much more powerful.  Most media today suggested that Bhutto had tainted her claim to support democracy by her \"deal with the devil,\" a reference to her power sharing agreement with President Musharraf.  8. (C) The media carried numerous stories about pending corruption charges against Bhutto and her husband for alleged graft and kickbacks of millions if not billions of dollars. Her Washington comments about granting the IAEA access to AQ Khan, about allowing the U.S. to strike terrorist targets in Pakistan, and about asserting control over the military have drawn considerable criticism from various sectors in Pakistani society.  9. (C) Bhutto has rejected the allegations as politically motivated.  Still, according to PPP contacts, Bhutto is concerned that Pakistan's Supreme Court may find the NRO unconstitutional.  The Supreme Court already has stayed its implementation of the NRO, and technically this means that Bhutto could face arrest.  Government sources have assured us she will not be arrested, but PML leaders did order that some PPP banners be taken down in Karachi.  Actions in the National Accountability Board to withdraw cases against Bhutto also are on hold pending the Court's decision.  10. (C) Comment: Bhutto's planned road trip across Pakistan is based on hard analysis that the PPP faces a battle to win a majority in the upcoming parliamentary elections in January.  Bhutto wants to solidify her base in Sindh and woo voters in Balochistan and Punjab.  She will need to assuage her party's concerns about her continued independence from the PML and decide whether to reach out to the religious right or other opposition parties.  She will have to fight for the right to again become Pakistan's Prime Minister.  But for today, she is basking in the applause of hundreds of thousands of fans.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/19/2007 13:04", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004494  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/19/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL, PTER, CASC SUBJECT: FORMER PAKISTAN PRIME MINISTER BHUTTO KARACHI ATTACK  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) Following is a description of the investigation to date provided by the Ministry of Interior to the RSO.  2.  (C) RSO met with the Secretary of the Ministry of Interior (MOI), Kamal Shah, the morning of October 19 to discuss the attack in Karachi on the motorcade of former Prime Minister (PM) of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto.  During a 45-minute conversation, and between his many other interruptions and phone calls, Kamal described what he knew about the attack and when the RSO had a question, Kamal picked up the phone and obtained the answer.  The following comments are the summary of relevant information to date regarding the attack as provided by the Ministry's top Police Official.  3.  (C) At the request of the former PM, the MOI provided a dedicated Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) as the Security Officer-in-Charge for Bhutto,s visit.  This SSP was requested by name by Bhutto and the MOI complied with her request and sent him to Karachi a week ahead of the arrival to deal with the security issues.  Based on a previous threat by Baitullah Mehsud against Bhutto, the MOI issued an order to develop and provide a plan with all security elements to make the event incident free.  Two days later, a Source report provided by Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), alleged that the specific threat to the former PM was from Al-Qaeda and Taliban elements. Secretary Shah showed RSO the ISI Source Report but the RSO  SIPDIS did not have the opportunity to read the entire document.  4.  (C) Based on this ISI threat report, Secretary Shah advised the Sindh government and police officials as well as all other provincial leaders of the threat and directed them to increase their efforts and resources toward this threat. Shah then spoke with the Home Secretary for Sindh regarding the use of Electronic Countermeasures (ECMs) in the motorcade on the former PM's vehicles.  The Home Secretary was in favor so Shah next requested specific authorization from the Office of the President for their use and received it.  Two ECMs were provided and placed on her vehicle.  ECMs are designed to block the signal emitted from a radio-frequency transmitter or a cell phone detonator device but has no effect on a hard-wired bomb or a suicide device.  The Office of the Minister of Interior as well as the SSP assigned to protect former PM Bhutto, requested that the former PM not follow her plan for a 12-hour slow-moving motorcade due to the defined specific threat and even offered helicopter resources to facilitate her movement.  The former PM rejected the offer and accused them of trying to hamper her welcome home.  5.  (C) The Police physically blocked all access roads onto the route the former PM's entourage would take, with the exception of authorized Pakistan People's Party (PPP) officials.  Though estimates of the crowd gathered to celebrate the return of the former PM range from 150,000 to 2 million, Secretary Shah advised the RSO that his Intelligence personnel working the crowd estimated the crowd to be around 150,000 but not more than 200,000.  6.  (C) The protective detail around Ms. Bhutto was set up with police protective vans and foot personnel on all four sides of the large semi-armored truck that the former PM was traveling in.  The attack came from the left.  Two explosions were heard.  The first was the lesser of the explosions and was identified as a grenade thrown to initially kill the police on that side, create chaos, and open the police cordon around the truck so that the suicide vested bomber could penetrate the cordon all the way to the truck.  Luckily for the former PM, the police recovered quickly, filling in the broken cordon and blocking the path of the suicide bomber. The bomber seeing that he was not going to make it any closer, detonated his 15 to 20 kilograms (33 to 44 lbs) of high explosives.  18 police died in the explosions and total numbers as identified by physical count by the police stands at this reporting as 133 dead and 263 wounded.  A question regarding the second explosion being a car bomb instead of a vest bomb was answered when they found no road crater at the  ISLAMABAD 00004494  002 OF 002   detonation site and instead found a head, suspected as being that of the vest bomber.  7.  (C) The numbers of dead will undoubtedly change as the seriously wounded succumb to their wounds.  The Mission and specifically the Consulate General in Karachi, will update information as it becomes available.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4472|07ISLAMABAD4491|07ISLAMABAD4493|07ISLAMABAD4494|07KARACHI728|07KARACHI736", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/20/2007 12:22", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004495  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/20/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, PINR, PK, ASEC, CASC SUBJECT: KARACHI BOMB BLASTS - THE DAY AFTER  REF: A. KARACHI 728      B. KARACHI 736      C. ISLAMABAD 4494      D. ISLAMABAD 4493      E. ISLAMABAD 4491      F. ISLAMABAD 4472  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: Immediately following the bombings, Karachi appeared in shock, focused on burying those killed in the attack and caring for the hundreds injured, but now there are emerging reports of increasing street violence, mostly aimed at closing businesses and venting anger at the bombings. Benazir Bhutto held an October 19 press conference calling the attack on her an attack \"on democracy\" and is spending today at Bilawal House comforting her supporters and the families of those killed.  She reportedly plans to continue her plans to travel to her ancestral home of Larkhana on Monday.  President Musharraf has ordered a report within 48 hours identifying those responsible for the attack.  END SUMMARY.  2. (U) ConGen Karachi reports the city is still stunned and grieving as the focus continues to be on funerals for the approximately 140 people killed in yesterday's (October 19) suicide bombing attack on the convoy of returning opposition leader Benazir Bhutto.  Over 75 percent of Karachi businesses are closed and early reports of isolated incidents of violence near M.A. Jinnah Road en route to the Lyari neighborhood and along Jahangir Road have increased sharply. Incidents appear centered on the stoning or strong-arming of people attempting to open their shops during what many people see as a time of public mourning.  Reports of random street violence are increasing and coming in from all parts of town, including downtown (relatively near the consulate) and the Defense Area (an upscale neighborhood).  Groups are apparently continuing to stone businesses trying to open, setting tires on fire, vandalizing and burning vehicles, and smashing windows.  There are also reports of gunfire.  3. (U) Meanwhile, thousands of out-of-town PPP supporters continue to wander aimlessly about town.  These people were transported to Karachi from their up-country homes for the Bhutto welcome rallies.  The PPP had organized a few schools and tented areas as rest stops for travelers, but had not arranged food and shelter as these supporters were expected to have returned home by now.  4. (C) CG Karachi also reports that Bhutto's October 19 press conference and the wide, positive coverage it received boosted morale among PPP leadership, still struggling to recover from the early morning tragedy.  The CG also reports that Bhutto is spending today at Bilawal House comforting her supporters and the families of the bombing victims.  5. (U) In her press conference remarks, Bhutto described the bombing of her convoy as an attack not on her, but \"on democracy and the very unity and integrity of Pakistan.\" Bhutto blamed the attacks on unnamed \"remnants of the Zia government.\" (Former dictator General Zia ul-Haq ordered the 1979 execution of Bhutto's father.)  She added that, before returning to Pakistan, she had written President Musharraf a letter naming 3 officials who should be investigated in the event of her assassination.  6. (S) Bhutto also stated that another country had informed her that several suicide squads had been dispatched to kill her - one from Taliban elements, one from Al Qaida, one from the Pakistani Taliban, and one based in Karachi.  (Comment: This information came from Dubai, was conveyed to Benazir by the government, and has apparently proven groundless, both from interrogations and cell phone coverage. End Comment.) She said the country that shared this information with her had also given telephone numbers of potential suicide bombers to the government of Pakistan. Bhutto refrained from holding the government directly responsible for the attacks, in contrast to earlier remarks made by her husband and supporters.  7. (U) Bhutto said she expects more attacks on her life and  ISLAMABAD 00004495  002 OF 002   suggested the likely modus operandi would be people planted within the police and posted near her home, or commandos disguised as members of a rival political party.  She said she had shared this information with President Musharraf and was confident the government would take pre-emptive measures.  She also noted that Musharraf, who called Bhutto to offer his condolences and assurances, was very sorry for the attack and had called on everyone to unite in the fight against extremism and militancy.  8. (C) According to PPP contact, Bhutto still plans to travel on Monday, October 22 to her ancestral home in Larkhana in Sindh Province (ref F) and remain there for several days. The contact said that Bhutto will be supported by 500 PPP security personnel and will also accept GoP security support.  (Musharraf reportedly offered the support of the Special Services Group, Pakistan's elite commando unit as well.) Bhutto's supporters are extremely concerned about her safety in traveling to Larkhana as tens of thousands of supporters are expected to turn out.  9. (U) At a meeting with senior staff to review the security situation following the attack, President Musharraf reportedly ordered the Ministries of Defense and Interior to re-draft counter-terrorism legislation that would be promulgated in a couple of days.  These changes, which have not yet been detailed, would be aimed at increasing authorities' abilities to track down terrorist elements and increase penalties for terrorist acts.  Musharraf also directed security agencies to prepare a report within 48 hours identifying those responsible for the Karachi attack.  10. (U) Meanwhile, Baitullah Mehsud, the pro-Taliban leader who had threatened to use suicide bombers against Bhutto if she returned, denied any responsibility or involvement in the attack.  11. (U) Opposition leaders generally echoed early remarks from the Bhutto camp, expressing shock at the carnage, blaming the government for lax security measures and speculating on the role intelligence agencies might have played in the attack.  MQM leader Altaf Hussein called Bhutto from London to offer his condolences and full cooperation in the struggle against extremism. Baloch nationalists' parties also condemned the attack but called on Bhutto to reconsider her cooperation with Musharraf, urging her to join other opposition parties in struggling against military rule.  12. (U) Minister of Information Muhammad Ali Durrani held a press conference October 19.  He extended the government's offer to hold an All Party Conference (APC) to work out a plan to combat terrorism, but added that such a conference could only succeed if all political parties attended.  He asserted that acts of terrorism would not derail upcoming general elections but added that the government intended to develop a \"program\" for political gatherings.  The program would be part of a security plan prepared by law-enforcement agencies.  13. (U) According to press reports, PML Leader Chaudhry Shujaat Hussein advised Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz to ban political rallies leading up to general assembly elections in early 2008.  Shujaat said public meetings should be permitted only in designated areas and at the request of political parties.  He also offered his view that elections should be held on time, noting that, otherwise, the government would be accused of deliberate manipulation.  14. (C) COMMENT: Despite the sporadic violence reported in Karachi, life for almost all Pakistanis has returned to normal as the nation mourns.  Media coverage of the actual bombing attack has, for the most part, ended, although it remains the hot topic on all the talk shows.  President Musharraf's call to Benazir Bhutto has received considerable positive press coverage.  The net effect is that the government is not seen as having provided adequate security; although, many of the so-called security failures, like inadequate jamming devices, would have made no difference at all against the suicide bomber.  END COMMENT. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/23/2007 14:50", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004531  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/23/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, ASEC, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO ASKS AMBASSADOR FOR SECURITY ASSESSMENT ASSISTANCE   Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY. Ambassador and Consul General Karachi met with Benazir Bhutto and members of her staff October 23 regarding a range of issues, but most urgently about her security.  Bhutto requested, in writing, that USG \"undertake an evaluation of existing executive security procedures and recommendation of additional resources necessary for maximum safety.\"  Ambassador recommends that we meet with members of her staff and provide list of security contractors who could provide this assessment.  2. (C) We strongly recommend against providing a U.S. Government evaluation, which will inevitably expose performance gaps that would not meet American standards of training and equipment.  Responsibility for security belongs with the Government of Pakistan.  We will keep stressing to both sides that government and Bhutto's party must work directly together to resolve any questions or issues regarding Bhutto's personal security.  END SUMMARY.  3. (C) Ambassador, CG and Information Officer met with Benazir Bhutto and members of her staff October 23 at her residence in Karachi.  (Other elements reported septel.)  4. (C) Bhutto gave a request in writing to the Ambassador that Embassy staff meet with AmCit Larry Wallace and members of Bhutto's staff to provide an assessment of her security. She seemed uncertain about what exactly this entailed, but she had heard that we had provided such assessments for others in the past.  The Ambassador said that there were situations in which the USG provided security - former President Aristide and President Karzai came to mind - but, in these situations, the security was basically turned over to American contractors supervised by official U.S. personnel.  The Ambassador doubted it would be consistent with a political campaign.  She noted there was also training provided through ATA and INL that provided anti-terrorist and law enforcement training but these were long-term in nature.  5. (C) Embassy proposes meeting with Wallace and PPP security experts to provide them with a list of responsible security contractors who could provide such an assessment.  Ambassador strongly recommends against a U.S. Government evaluation, which would inevitably identify gaps (by American standards) in both equipment and training of personnel.  The USG should either undertake full responsibility for Bhutto's personal security or not.  We also believe it highly unlikely that the PPP would follow professional recommendations not to hold rallies in large crowds.  Protection of prime ministerial candidates is the responsibility of the government of Pakistan, and the GoP must provide the best possible security for Bhutto and other candidates.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4271", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/25/2007 13:43", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004573  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, PREL, PK SUBJECT: POLITICAL ROUNDUP: BHUTTO CAMPAIGNING; MUSHARRAF CASE CONTINUES; U.S. GROUP ASSESSES ELECTION CLIMATE  REF: ISLAMABAD 4271  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde for Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Despite ongoing security concerns, Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto announced October 25 that she would travel to Larkhana on October 27 where tens of thousands are expected to welcome her.  Pakistan's Supreme Court continues to hear the case against Musharraf's re-election.  Meanwhile, the U.S.'s National Democratic Institute (NDI), led by former Senator Tom Daschle, conducted a pre-election assessment and noted complaints by opposition parties, media and civil society.  The NDI group publicly chided the GOP and urged greater \"transparency.\"  End summary.  Another Homecoming for Bhutto -----------------------------  2. (C) People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto announced October 25 that she would return to her family's ancestral village of Larkhana on Saturday (October 27).  Tens of thousands of party supporters are expected to greet her and line the highway from the airport to this village in the heart of Sindh.  The GOP will provide security, but Bhutto clearly does not fully trust this protection.  We hear about 500 PPP staff/volunteers will supplement her security circle.  Musharraf Case Part II ----------------------  3. (U) An 11-justice panel of Pakistan's Supreme Court began hearing arguments October 18 against President Musharraf's October 6 re-election.  Two opposition presidential candidates -- the legal fraternities' Supreme Court Justice (retired) Wajihuddin Ahmed and People's Party (PPP) President Makhdoom Amin Faheem -- have brought the principal petitions arguing that Musharraf should have been disqualified from running because he still serves as Chief of Army Staff (reftel).  4. (C) The Court rejected similar arguments September 28. Even on this specific case, the Court has already ruled against petitioners' motions -- to stay the presidential election (October 5) and for a full 17-member bench hearing (October 17).  Pro-government Justice Javed Iqbal has been left to preside over a smaller panel, which court watchers characterize as having four solid Musharraf backers, but also four likely Musharraf dissenters.  A pro-Musharraf majority, however slim, is widely predicted.  The case is expected to last for about another week.  U.S. Group Urges Transparency -----------------------------  5. (U) Meanwhile, in preparation for the general elections anticipated early January 2008, the National Democratic Institute (NDI) concluded October 21 its pre-election assessment mission led by former U.S. Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle.  After five days of meetings with the GOP, political parties, media and civil society, the U.S. group voiced its concerns in a public statement.  6. (U) The NDI delegation put forward 21 recommendations for action by Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP), the police, and the GOP more generally, as well as by the political parties.  The recommendations touch upon issues of election integrity, governance, electoral rights, and election coordination and observation.  NDI's public statement  said that the GOP must take \"urgent steps\" to contain political violence, produce an accurate voters' list, curtail security agencies' interference in the electoral process, involve all party leaders, and protect the rights of women voters. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4340", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/25/2007 14:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004574  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S RELIGIOUS PARTIES: AN UNHAPPY MARRIAGE  REF: ISLAMABAD 4340  1. (SBU) Summary: Differences have surfaced again between Jamiat Ulema Islam's Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) and Jamaat Islami (JI) -- the two largest parties within the religious Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA) coalition.  The row this time is over MMA's failure to dissolve the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) Assembly prior to President Musharraf's October 6 re-election.  JUI-F is viewed as having accommodated the ruling coalition and military establishment, contrary to JI's more confrontational approach.  While both parties have recently said they are calling it quits, both JUI-F and JI know they would suffer at the polls if the MMA were to split.  After general elections, most observers predict JUI-F will side with whichever party forms a ruling coalition.  End summary.  The Plan  2. (U) Leading up to the October 6 presidential election, the All Parties Democratic Movement (APDM), an opposition party alliance, assumed the MMA-dominated NWFP Assembly would be dissolved.  Denying Musharraf any of the province's 65 electoral votes was intended to be a political embarrassment for Musharraf.  3. (U) The APDM parties -- principally Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz and the MMA -- decided September 27 to order all of their members to resign on October 2 from the National and Provincial Assemblies. The NWFP Assembly was specifically excluded from this order because, being controlled by the MMA, it would be dissolved on the same day.  Feeling Aggrieved  4. (U) However, before the MMA could dissolve the NWFP Assembly, pro-government parties orchestrated a procedural coup -- a no-confidence vote against the JUI-F Chief Minister -- which stalled further action and blocked dissolution until after the presidential election.  Once the dust had settled, the finger pointing began.  5. (U) JI accused the provincial assembly's Chief Minister (a JUI-F partisan) of delaying his call on the NWFP Governor to dissolve the provincial assembly; JUI-F countered that the assembly's speaker (a JI party man) purposely recognized the no-confidence motion on the floor of the assembly against JUI-F leadership.  By October 6, JI's 24 NWFP assembly members had resigned, while JUI-F members remained, three of whom voted for Musharraf.  6. (SBU) Sources report that JUI-F's Fazlur Rehman and JI's Qazi Hussain Ahmed are no longer on speaking terms.  This is not the first time, however, that these two party leaders have clashed.  The two differed on the 2006 Women's Protection Bill; Ahmed favored resignation then too, while Rehman opposed the decision.  Rehman's Agenda  7. (SBU) The widely-held perspective of MMA contacts is that JUI-F's Rehman has accommodated Musharraf.  The delay between when the APDM decided to resign (September 27) and when its members actually did resign (October 2) was unnecessary, yet Rehman insisted upon it.  By the time the resignations occurred on October 2, the MMA had no maneuvering room to counter a procedural motion, which is exactly what happened and which JI and JUI-F sources claim was Rehman's intention all along.  Moreover, our various MMA interlocutors point out that there was no legal hurdle preventing the JUI-F Chief Minister from seeking immediate dissolution of the NWFP Assembly after APDM's September 27 decision.  8. (SBU) Rehman makes no secret of his aspirations to become Prime Minister of a coalition government, with PolOffs or more publicly. (Comment: Post considers any scenario with Rehman as Prime Minister highly unlikely.  End comment.)  JUI-F deputy Ghafoor Haidri has also mentioned to PolOffs Rehman's willingness to quit MMA after the upcoming general elections.  Rehman appears to have kept his future options open by helping Musharraf save face now.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4531", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/27/2007 11:26", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004599  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2017 TAGS: PREL, ASEC, PTER, CASC, PINR, PK, PGOV SUBJECT: DISCUSSION WITH BHUTTO DESIGNEES REGARDING SECURITY  REF: ISLAMABAD 4531 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  RSO met October 26 with two individuals empowered by Benazir Bhutto to discuss her security. As per reftel, RSO provided names of three security contractors who can provide security assessments and a full range of security services. There has been no reduction in police protection for Bhutto although changes in the leadership of both the investigation (at Bhutto,s request) and the detail have brought about new faces. The Embassy at all levels will continue to reiterate the GOP,s responsibility to provide security for Bhutto.  We did so again October 27 to National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz.  He assured Ambassador and DCM the GOP was doing everything possible to provide for Benazir,s security.  Other agencies continue to provide support to GOP efforts.  With the UK Ambassador, we will reiterate our willingness to provide technical law enforcement assistance to the investigation.  RSO and CG will also follow up with their law enforcement contracts in Karachi. End Summary.  2. (C) RSO Islamabad and RSO Karachi met October 26 with two individuals who were designated, in writing, by Bhutto to speak about her security. (Note: Islamabad,s RSO has previously served in Karachi and had been involved in some high profile cases. End Note.)  The two individuals were AmCit Larry G. Wallace and M. Zia Ispahani, President, PPP Foreign Liaison Committee.  Wallace has close ties to Senator Mark Pryor (D-AR).  3. (C) In the discussion, Wallace brought up several concerns.  He told RSO that Rick (last name unknown) from the Dubai Blackwater office had called him and advised him that there was a specific threat against Wallace,s life within the next 48 hours. Wallace immediately, in the middle of the night, packed his bags and moved from the Sindh Club (across the street from the Consulate) to the Marriott Hotel (next door to the Consulate). He asked RSO what he should do. RSO told him that he monitored most threat information and that, if there was something specific about Wallace, RSO thought he would have been likely to see it. The Embassy is unaware of the motivation for Blackwater allegedly providing this information to Wallace.  RSO briefed Wallace on security awareness.  4. (C) Wallace stated there was a perception that the police had pulled away their protection from Benazir Bhutto.  Most of the time, Bhutto has remained in her Bilawal House compound, so the assumption was that the police had reduced security around the compound. The police assured RSO they had not pulled security off her compound. The police have simply opened the perimeter up a little to allow more privacy and freedom, but the security is still there.  5. (C) RSO discussed with Wallace the need for Bhutto to follow the security advice responsible security personnel were providing. The first security officer had been a Senior Superintendent of Police whom Bhutto had hand-picked.  He advised Bhutto not to make the long motorcade run but was ignored. After the blast, this individual was removed from Bhutto,s protection/case. His supervisor, Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Karachi Manzar Mughal then took over the investigation, but a few days ago was pulled off it at Bhutto,s request.  When the DIG Central Investigative Division received the investigation, it was by this time a &cold case.8 It is possible that with such widespread personnel changes on the security team each time the lead investigator is changed, the PPP and Bhutto believe the police are pulling back.  Instead, it appears to be a changing of the guard and opinion as to how tight the perimeter should be.  6. (C) Wallace stated to RSO that &all8 Senators and Congresspersons believed the United States should provide Bhutto with security. RSO told Wallace that it was not only improper and impractical in Pakistan but it would require massive resources to do so. Security could be provided by a US Special Forces Team but it would not make any difference. They would all be &fish out of water8 since they did not know the local culture and situation.  Perhaps worse, RSO stressed, an American team would cause anger and hostility with their presence and raise her profile beyond a safe and acceptable level. RSO stressed that it was necessary to hire a Pakistani protective services team that understood the indigenous environment, the cultural implications, the physical location, the political issues, and had contacts with Pakistani police and intelligence. RSO then told Wallace  ISLAMABAD 00004599  002 OF 002   and Zia he had prepared a list of the three biggest full-service Pakistani protective services companies with offices in Karachi. RSO discussed the three companies, strengths and weaknesses and told them this would be the proper and most efficient and effective way to handle her security.  7. (C)  Wallace told RSO this was what he needed to hear and thanked RSO for the time, guidance and the list of names.  8. (C) On October 27, Ambassador and DCM met with National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz and reiterated the government,s responsibility for Bhutto,s security.  Aziz assured us the government was doing everything possible to provide for her security (and we are working closely with GOP through other channels to support those efforts) and the issue regarding her armed personnel would be resolved directly with her. Bhutto will meet with the new head of Pakistan,s Inter Services Intelligence, General Nadeem Taj.  Additionally, Aziz and General Hamid Javid, Chief of Staff to the President, will travel to Karachi to meet with her.  Embassy will also meet with the Ministry of Interior to reiterate our offer of forensic and technical assistance through law enforcement, rather than intelligence, channels.  RSO will return to Karachi this week to meet with police contacts.  9. (C)  Comment:  Even with support from the government, serious threats against Bhutto will persist, just as they have against other Pakistani leaders, including the President, Prime Minister, and most recently, the Minister of Interior.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3476|07ISLAMABAD4363|07PESHAWAR559", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/27/2007 12:48", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004601  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: AMGT, EAID, PGOV, KPAO, PK, PTER, PREL SUBJECT: FATA PLAN IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE: OCTOBER 26 2007  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4363      B. ISLAMABAD 3476      C. PESHAWAR 559  1. (SBU) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUESTS:  Per Ref A, Post requests urgent action on two pending requests: 1) Funding for a temporary FATA Coordinator; and,  2) Renewal of funding for a critical Pashto-language radio program. (See Paras 3 and 4 for action requests.)  Post appreciates the swift response to its Ref A request for deployment of a Military Information Support Team (MIST) to Pakistan, and welcomes the arrival of an assessment team in early November.  Meanwhile, USAID,s Office of Transition Initiatives (OTI) has established a continuous presence in Peshawar.  Security remains a significant concern, but OTI is pressing forward to identify working partners for project implementation in early 2008.  END SUMMARY.  ACTION NEEDED: FATA Coordinator and Pashto Radio Program --------------------------------------------- -----------  2. (SBU) The front office has interviewed via DVC a WAE candidate for Mission FATA coordinator.  (See previous requests, including draft position description.)  The Ambassador believes that, based on the candidate's previous experience, he would be an excellent choice to fill this critical coordination role until a permanent position is established and filled.  If funding is provided, this candidate could be on the ground in Islamabad by mid-November.  3. (SBU) Post again encourages the Department to release $140,000 funding for vital Pashto-language radio programming (Ref A).  This programming broadcasts moderate viewpoints to the border areas and is a key, cost-effective element of our counter-insurgency strategy.  USAID:  Moving Forward ----------------------  4. (SBU) Although security remains a significant issue, USAID is moving forward swiftly on project implementation. USAID/OTI has established a presence in Peshawar to strengthen community and government relations in the FATA. USAID/OTI has identified the International Organization for Migration as an implementing partner and plans to select others very soon, hoping to have them on the ground in November.  The focus will be on small grants projects (USD 8,000-30,000 each) for water and sanitation, roads, etc.  OTI expects to begin implementation of these programs by January/February 2008.  5. (SBU) USAID/Pakistan is also reviewing proposals from potential capacity building contractors.  The final decision will be made in the next few weeks and a contract is planned for December, with implementation beginning January 2008.  A team from USAID Afghanistan will also visit Peshawar December 1-5 to begin discussions with USAID Pakistan on a possible cross-border trade initiative.  ODRP:  Security Development Plan (SDP) -------------------------------------  6. (SBU) In support of our efforts for greater coordination and integration with U.S. efforts in Afghanistan, the Office of the Defense Representative to Pakistan (ODRP) participated in an October 17 border coordination meeting in Bagram, Afghanistan.  Several key players with equities along the Pak-Afghan border met to discuss their programs and determine where further coordination and/or integration might be warranted.  The meetings will be held monthly and the Narcotics Affairs director will go to the next one.  Combined Joint Task Force-82 is leaning forward on Border Surveillance Centers (BSC) and has requested USD 17.4 million for future BSCs.  DEA Training ------------  7. (SBU) DEA received approval from the Afghan government to bring four Pakistani officers to Afghanistan for training. There are also tentative plans for lab training from November 19-21 for Frontier Corps and Anti Narcotic Force personnel.  ISLAMABAD 00004601  002 OF 002   DEA will also bring the head of the Afghan counter-narcotics-vetted unit to meet with  Pakistani colleagues.  Islamabad,s Narcotics Affairs Section reported that USD 59 million is available for counter-narcotics in FY-08.  Public Diplomacy Efforts and MIST Team --------------------------------------  8. (SBU) Post welcomes the proposal to deploy a four-person military information support team (MIST) led at the Colonel level to visit Islamabad and Peshawar from November 13-15 to assess information operations and opportunities. Islamabad,s Public Affairs Section has also developed a media strategy for the FATA.  Consistent and transparent outreach will be critical to overcoming traditional FATA suspicion of government programs, especially those associated with the USG.  For maximum transparency, we will post a comprehensive page on the Embassy web site explaining how the USG is supporting the Government of Pakistan,s strategy for FATA development. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4602|07LAHORE656", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/29/2007 15:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004625  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, KJUS, PREL, PK SUBJECT: MORE SIGNS THAT SUPREME COURT MAY RULE IN FAVOR OF MUSHARRAF  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4602      B. LAHORE 656  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: President Musharraf's inner circle is still very concerned about a Supreme Court decision against Musharraf's eligibility to run for re-election, but, according to a senior attorney who initially argued the case against Musharraf, the Court will probably not rule against President Musharraf's re-election.  The Court may rule once again that the petitioners against Musharraf lack standing, and the ruling will likely be 7-4 in favor of the President, he said.  One of the attorneys for the plaintiffs did not appear in court on October 29, and opposition parties are planning on a pro-Musharraf verdict.  Although other anti-government verdicts are possible -- the Court may rule that the National Reconciliation Ordinance is not legal and that Nawaz Sharif should be allowed to return to Pakistan -- it still appears likely that the Court will go easy on the Musharraf case.  Still, a lot of this is speculation on both the part of the government and attorneys, and the Court has surprised observers before.  End summary.  ---------------------------- PPP Plaintiff's Attorney MIA ----------------------------  2. (C) People's Party (PPP) Senator Sardar Latif Khosa failed to appear before the Supreme Court today (Oct 29) on behalf of the party's presidential candidate, PPP chairman Makhdoom Amin Faheem.  A PPP contact told PolOff that Khosa left for London after PPP leader Benazir Bhutto ordered him to stand down.  Another PPP attorney briefly came before the Supreme Court to announce that the PPP would adopt in toto Aitzaz Ahsen's argument of last week.  Ahsen had argued for the legal fraternities' presidential candidate Wajihuddin Ahmed.  3. (C) PPP sources viewed today's non-action as a political gift to Musharraf.  They equated today's legal maneuver to the party's October 6 election ploy to stay in Parliament but not show up for the vote.  This time, the PPP has maintained its petition against Musharraf's running for re-election in uniform, but has avoided days of media headlines outlining the party's opposition.  Khosa told PolOff on October 24 that Bhutto was on the verge of pulling Faheem's petition, but reversed herself at the 11th hour, ordering Khosa to \"strenuously argue the case against Musharraf,\" i.e., repeat the opposition's case for as long as the Court would allow him center stage.  Khosa's absence in court shows that Bhutto changed her mind.  ----------------------------- Court May Decide Opposition's Case Is Not Maintainable -----------------------------  4. (C) Attorney General Malik Qayyum argued that the petitions against President Musharraf's eligibility to run for re-election were not maintainable -- meaning that the Court should dismiss the case based on procedural rather than substantive grounds.  (Note: The government won its last challenge to Musharraf's eligibility by using the \"non-maintainability\" argument.  End Note.)  5. (C) Senior attorney Mohammad Akram Sheikh, who argued this first case against Musharraf's eligibility prior to the October 6 election, told PolOff that Qayyum's argument may be the escape route the Court will use to avoid an anti-Musharraf decision.  While the judges will not rule that Musharraf is eligible to run for president while Chief of Army Staff, they may rule (once again) that they do not have the jurisdiction to decide the issue.  Potential \"non-maintainability\" decisions include:  -- The Chief Election Commissioner's decisions on eligibility are final and cannot be contested in court; -- The plaintiffs should appeal to a High Court before the Supreme Court; -- The plaintiffs are not complaining that their fundamental rights were violated, only for their statutory rights of candidature, and as such, they are not appealable to the Supreme Court; or  ISLAMABAD 00004625  002 OF 002   -- The plaintiffs were proxy candidates who contested the election only to challenge Musharraf's candidacy, and the Court cannot pronounce a judgment on a pseudo-candidates' objections.  6. (C) The Court could also take a harder line but still not directly oppose Musharraf, Sheikh said.  Another possible decision would require Musharraf to remove his uniform and run for president again.  The Court could also allow him to remain president only until new assemblies are in place.  7. (C) Either way, Sheikh said, the vote will likely be 7-4 in favor of the government.  Two of the swing votes (Raja Fayyaz Ahmed and Ghulam Rabbani) will take direction from the Chief Justice.  Sheikh said that Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry would have formed a full bench if he had wanted them to make an anti-government ruling, since a full court would likely have ruled against Musharraf.  -------------------------- No Game Plan by Opposition --------------------------  8. (C) Meanwhile, the various opposition groups that make up the All Parties Democratic Movement (APDM) are as disjointed as they were before the October 6 presidential election. PolOff met October 29 with Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) Information Secretary Ahsan Iqbal and with Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) Senator Maulana Rahat Hussain, separately.  They both believed the Court would return a pro-Musharraf verdict by November 1.  Their parties were not even making plans to protest the ruling, both admitted. Hussain said that the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) coalition of religious parties will not meet until November 8 to discuss a possible reaction.  --------------------------------------------- Other Decisions May Go Against the Government ---------------------------------------------  9. (C) While the Supreme Court may have resigned itself to endorse Musharraf's eligibility, they may not show sympathy for the government in other cases.  According to Mohammad Akram Sheikh, the Court will likely rule that the National Reconciliation Ordinance (NRO) is not legal and that former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif should be allowed to return to Pakistan.  Even attorneys Aitzaz Ahsen and Latif Khosa -- both PPP members -- agreed that there is a strong case to be made against the legality of the NRO.  10. (C) The Court is scheduled to hear the Nawaz Sharif case on October 30 and could make a final ruling as early as tomorrow.  11. (C) Comment: Although Musharraf's inner circle is still anxious about a negative Court ruling and is busily concocting contingency plans, indications are still that the Court will not rule against him.  But even with another Supreme Court win in his pocket, Musharraf might still face defeat on his attempts to avoid contempt charges for government officials involved in the Nawaz deportation and to mend political fences with Benazir Bhutto.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4599", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "10/31/2007 13:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004652  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2017 TAGS: ASEC, PGOV, PTER, PINR, PREL, PK SUBJECT: UK AND US AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH INTERIOR MINISTER SHERPAO  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4599       B. ISLAMABAD 4494  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) .  1. (C) Summary:  UK and US ambassadors reiterated October 29 the offer of law enforcement assistance to Interior minister Sherpao and MOI secretary (and former Karachi police chief) Kamal Shah.  Sherpao said the investigation into the October 18 Karachi bombing was proceeding well.  A formal request for foreign help had become difficult because it would encourage a perception that the government could not do its job, he said.  Sherpao and Shah agreed to suggestion of UK ambassador that they brief Benazir Bhutto on the progress of the investigation.  MOI has already identified suspects with ties to terrorist groups.  Sherpao pointed out previous suicide bombings in Karachi had been resolved.  MOI has allowed Bhutto to use her own armed personnel and cars with tinted windows.  GOP has also provided additional armored vehicles. Embassy is faxing to desk points from Musharraf,s chief of staff provided on security provided to Bhutto.  RSO will also touch base with Shah and with Bhutto,s security personnel to follow up to his previous discussions.  End summary.  2. (C) US and UK ambassadors called on Minister of Interior Sherpao and MOI secretary (and former Karachi police chief) Kamal Shah October 29 to reiterate offer of law enforcement assistance.  UK ambassador recalled the Minister had already rejected assistance but noted that our law enforcement personnel might have capabilities that the Pakistani police lack.  Ambassador said her interest was also a political one:  she understood foreign law enforcement personnel did not have informants nor the language for direct involvement in Karachi, and she understood the government confronted a dilemma in that it could not appear as if it were caving in to international pressure.  Still, outside assistance might help the government validate the results of its own investigation.  And it did not have to come from the US or the UK.   Sherpao said that Bhutto had closed out the option politically ) &if she had only made her request privately,8 he said, &and if only she had not focused it on the US and the UK.8  But he said he would ask the chief investigator in Sindh once again if there was anything he needed.  3. (C) UK ambassador recommended that Bhutto be briefed on the progress of the investigation.  Kamal Shah said that he would have the Sindh chief investigator talk to her but ask her not to divulge details of an ongoing investigation to the press.  Shah said that suicide bombings in Karachi, including those against Americans, had almost always been resolved: they already had some suspects with ties to terrorist groups.  Regarding Bhutto,s specific concerns, they were allowing her people to have weapons, to use tinted windows, and were providing more armored vehicles and trying to work with her security personnel.  4. (C) RSO will follow up with Shah and with Bhutto's security personnell to see if any action has been taken regarding the hiring of a security firm as per reftel. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4531|07KARACHI756", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/3/2007 16:52", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004692  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/03/2017 TAGS: PREL, ASEC, PTER, PINR, PK, PGOV SUBJECT: SECURITY STATUS UPDATE - FORMER PRIME MINISTER BENAZIR BHUTTO  REF: A. KARACHI 756      B. ISLAMABAD 4531 AND PREVIOUS  Classified By: RSO RANDALL BENNETT, REASONS 1.4 (B, C, D)  1.  (C) SUMMARY - According to the Sindh Inspector General (IGP) of Police, the suicide bombing attack of October 19 against former PM Bhutto (reftels) was carried out by two persons and was probably made possible due to the thorough advance public revelation of her plans and the snail-paced movement of the motorcade, which was advised against by Pakistani Police, PPP advisors, and outside associates and contacts.  The casualties were 140 dead and almost 500 wounded.  There were 200 Karachi Police Officers assigned to protect the former PM at her residence and during motorcade movements. (Note: Bhutto is now in Dubai. End Note.)  This is augmented by a mix of armed Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) personnel.  During an interview with the Sindh Province Inspector General of Police (IGP), RSO Karachi was told that the police are not permitted inside the former PM's Bilawal House perimeter walls due to fears that she will be attacked by men in police uniforms.  This was verified by a ConGen Karachi Surveillance Detection Team Supervisor who lives in the neighborhood and spoke with the perimeter police officers.  RSO Islamabad has been in touch with Bhutto's Chief of Security, retired Major General Ahsan, who, though fanatically devoted to the former PM and the PPP, does not seem to know much about actual personal protective security procedures or methods.  END SUMMARY.  ----------------------------- SUICIDE BOMBING ATTACK UPDATE -----------------------------  2.  (C) On November 01, RSO Karachi met with the Sindh Province IGP for a lengthy two-hour meeting to discuss various aspects of former PM Benazir Bhutto,s security.  The IGP was very forthcoming in his comments and stated that prior to the arrival of Bhutto to Karachi, four high level meetings were held between the GoP and officials of the PPP representing Bhutto.  Two meetings were held in the IGP Office and the other two were in the office of the Sindh Home Secretary.  In these meetings, it was made clear to the PPP  SIPDIS representatives that certain dangers were inherent in the return of Bhutto to Karachi, mostly directed by elements from the northern areas.  A detailed security plan was worked out for her arrival and a practice motorcade was even conducted over the same route.  RSO Karachi was shown the planning file, which was about two inches thick.  The Police felt the plan was sound and effective but advised the PPP representatives that the motorcade could not move as slowly as they wanted and should not take more than one hour to cover the 20 Kilometers.  This proposal was rejected.  3.  (C) The IGP stated the motorcade was moving at literally a walking pace.  Two suicide bombers apparently approached from the left.  The first bomber came from the left rear wearing an explosive device around his waist that was approximately 5 kilos in size. ( Note: This was originally thought to be a thrown grenade. End Note.)  The device detonated about 20 feet from Bhutto,s vehicle.  One police vehicle took the brunt of the initial blast.  Approximately one minute later, the second bomber came from the left front wearing the device on his chest, which was about 12 kilos of high explosive material and detonated approximately 25 feet from Bhutto,s vehicle.  This device had been heavily packed with ball bearings to maximize its destructive effect.  Much of this blast was initially taken by one police vehicle and two parked PPP cars.  140 people died from the two blasts, of which six were police officers. (Note: Earlier reporting indicated 18-20 police officers were killed. End Note.) There were also about 500 persons wounded.  The heads of the bombers were recovered and it appears they are from the northern areas and received assistance from \"handlers\" in Karachi.  The IGP commented to RSO Karachi that this attack is described to be essentially the same in design as eleven previous attacks throughout Pakistan.  -------------------------------------- BHUTTO,S CURRENT SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS --------------------------------------  4.  (C) The IGP Sindh advised RSO Karachi that the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Imtiaz, was personally chosen by Bhutto to be the police officer in charge of her police security element since he was known to her.  SSP Imtiaz currently has 200 police officers working the physical security issues of the residence/party headquarters (Bilawal  ISLAMABAD 00004692  002 OF 002   House) and her vehicle motorcades.  The PPP has also forced their own armed personnel into the protective mix to compensate for their low trust level of any GoP support.  It should be noted that no police are permitted inside the Bilawal House perimeter walls, allegedly due to Bhutto,s belief the next attack will come from people wearing police uniforms.  When Bhutto travels by motorcade in Karachi, there are 3 to 4 police escort vehicles with 20 officers and 2 armored vehicles with tinted windows for Bhutto.  These armored vehicles were imported for Bhutto by the PPP prior to her arrival.  The motorcade is assisted by police motorcycles clearing the way.  The armed PPP security people also travel in these motorcades and have been given permission to display their weapons in public.  A ConGen Karachi Surveillance Detection Team Supervisor lives in the same neighborhood as the Bilawal House and through innocuous conversations with on-duty police officers has corroborated the security arrangements.  He was also told that the police are unhappy because they are not given any access to basic conveniences like bathrooms or potable water.  The PPP and police are also in conflict over accusations that the police are tearing down the pro-Bhutto posters in the neighborhood.  ---------------------------- SECURITY ELEMENTS OF THE PPP ----------------------------  5.  (C) RSO Islamabad made phone contact with Bhutto,s Chief of Security, retired Major General Ahsan.  Ahsan is a staunch, even fanatical, protector of Bhutto and defender of the PPP and proudly told the RSO of how he still carries a bullet in his leg from some previous political-related incursion.  RSO Islamabad told Ahsan that his only interest was to follow up on a couple of items the USG was interested in. (See Ref. B) Ahsan agreed completely that this was a PPP and GoP issue.  The RSO asked him if they had reviewed the list of three Pakistani security companies he submitted to them for their consideration and if they had made a decision or at least made contact.  Ahsan stated that he and the PPP are completely against any outside organization overseeing their security and that he only trusts PPP personnel.  Ahsan advised RSO two PPP men were arriving to work with him to oversee all security issues and they would use only PPP personnel since no one else could be trusted.  Ahsan also stated update briefings on the bombing investigation were not being provided to Bhutto as promised.  Ahsan stated that they still want the Pakistani Police to conduct the investigation but they want foreign involvement in the forensic areas, specifically the FBI and Scotland Yard.  Major General Ahsan also requested that the RSO not mention his name to any Ministry of Interior officials due to some conflicts he had with them in the past.  The RSO will attempt to validate this information through the Secretary of the MOI and will continue to monitor any changes to the situation.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/3/2007 20:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004694  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, MARR, PINR, AMGT SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 02, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: MUSHARRAF SPEAKS; JUSTICES AND POTENTIAL DISSIDENTS ROUNDED UP  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde for reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary.  Musharraf defended his decision to suspend the Constitution in an emotional speech aired on Pakistan Television; notably, he did not mention a schedule for elections or his plan to resign as Chief of Army Staff.  The government continues to block cable distribution of most international and local TV news channels.  Pakistan People's Party leader Bhutto returned to Karachi and said she was \"bitterly disappointed\" at Musharraf's action.  Musharraf used his new powers to dismiss the Supreme Court and provincial high court justices and personally swore in a new Supreme Court justice.  There are unconfirmed reports that approximately 80 anti-government lawyers have been arrested. The situation on the streets of Islamabad and all major cities remains quiet.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Musharraf defended his decision to suspend the Constitution in an emotional late-night speech aired on Pakistan Television.   Notably, Musharraf did not mention a schedule for elections and did not reiterate his pledge to resign as Chief of Army Staff.  Citing growing extremism, loss of confidence among the law enforcement community, growing public insecurity, judicial plots, undue interference of the courts, and court decisions to release terrorists, he explained his reasons for taking action.  He outlined three stages of development for Pakistan -- from 1999-2002, he led the country; from 2002-2007, he gradually reintroduced democracy; then he claimed he was only months away from the final stage of moving back to democracy, which he would lead as a civilian head of state.  The judiciary, he said, was endangering this last phase, and this demanded imposition of emergency rule.  He broke off from Urdu to appeal in English to the West, especially to the U.S.  He pleaded several times: \"Bear with us.\"  He quoted from an 1864 letter written by Abraham Lincoln in which Lincoln described his agonizing decision to suspend parts of the U.S. civil liberties.  He described the Constitutional Order as being \"precise\" and said that democratic governance will happen, \"inshahallah.\"  3.  (U)  Upon her arrival in Karachi at 2200, Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto said \"Unless General Musharraf reverses the course, it will be very difficult to have fair elections...I agree with him that we are facing a political crisis but believe the problem is dictatorship....It's a very difficult situation for the country.  Instead of moving to democracy we are going backwards towards greater dictatorship..The public and I are bitterly disappointed.\"  PPP Spokesman Farhatullah Babar went further and condemned Musharraf's actions.  4. (U)  Media reports that the former Chief Justice and at least seven other justices have been detained; all the Supreme Court and provincial high court justices have been removed.  Musharraf personally swore in Abdul Hameed Dogar as the new Chief Justice.  According to post sources, unlike in 1999 when Musharraf demanded and received the loyalty of most high court justices, many of the judges on the provincial high courts today refused to take the new oath of loyalty.  5.  (U) At 2230 local time, leader of the lawyers' movement Aitzaz Ahsan was being transferred from a police station in Islamabad to Adiala Prison in Rawalpindi.  Ahsan's senior associate claimed that so far about 80 anti-government attorneys had been arrested.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4691|07ISLAMABAD4692|07ISLAMABAD4693|07ISLAMABAD4694", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/4/2007 9:33", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004695  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 03, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD; QUIET SUNDAY MORNING; GROWING DISSIDENT ARRESTS  REF: A. TD 3/CA/161-07      B. ISLAMABAD 4694      C. ISLAMABAD 4693      D. ISLAMABAD 4692      E. ISLAMABAD 4691  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson for reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  Pakistan's first morning under the state of emergency was a quiet one throughout Pakistan.  Both Embassy and Consulates report business as usual on the streets. However, we are receiving increasing reports of arrests of opposition figures and human rights activists.  The government has continued disruption of private television news stations, although newspapers distributed their usual Sunday editions.  The MFA convoked chiefs of mission to explain the emergency situation; Ambassador protested the heavy handed and thuggish implementation of the emergency measures.  DCM called Presidential Advisor Tariq Aziz to request a meeting for the Ambassador with President Musharraf.  DCM told Aziz the U.S. was deeply concerned that Musharraf in his speech last night had not mentioned a timetable for elections or his resignation as Army Chief of Staff.  The U.S. was also deeply disturbed over the arrests of political opposition figures and human rights activists and the continued government block on private TV news channels.  Post held an EAC meeting this morning.  END SUMMARY.  2. (U) Although some roads remain blocked, especially Islamabad's Constitution Avenue in front of the Supreme Court, the first day under the state of emergency began like any other Sunday for most Pakistanis.  Consulates Karachi, Lahore and Peshawar all report that shops have opened as usual and people began to move about on regular weekend business.  3.  (U)  The government continues to block transmission of private TV news stations.  The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) has issued a new order restricting the press from criticizing the President or the government (see septel reporting).  Sunday morning newspapers - both English and Urdu - were disturbed as usual.  Land and mobile phone service remains sporadic.  4. (C) There are increasing reports of the arrest and detention of up to 100 human rights activists, political opposition figures and lawyers.  This includes the house arrest of prominent human rights activist Asma Jahangir and Pakistan Tehreek Insaaf (PTI) President Imran Khan, and the arrest of Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) in-country leader Javed Hashmi.  The bulk of political arrests appear aimed at members of the All Parties Democratic Movement, which includes  PML-N, PTI and the religious parties, but not the Pakistan People's Party (PPP).  Bhutto returned to Karachi last night and is holding talks with PPP leaders today.  Opposition parties and civil rights activists are planning for large demonstrations across the country on November 5.  The government continues to replace members of the Supreme Court and provincial high court judiciary (septel).  5. (U) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs convoked chiefs of missions for a briefing this morning.  The U.S. was briefed along with the UK, Canada, EU missions and Australia; Islamic countries were briefed separately.  A clearly uncomfortable Foreign Secretary Riaz Khan walked Ambassadors through the details of the President's speech, reiterated Pakistan would need the help and patience of the international community and claimed that government is fully functioning and that \"martial law\" martial law has not been imposed.  The Ambassador strongly condemned the heavy handed and thuggish nature of the implementation of the emergency measures, citing in particular the 90-day house arrest of Asma Jahangir (who presents no threat to Pakistani security, but whose arrest will be widely seen in the west as wildly excessive) and the police interference in the operations of the electronic media.  The UK, EU, Japan, France, Australia and Canada all expressed their concerns regarding imposition  ISLAMABAD 00004695  002 OF 002   of emergency measures and restoration of democracy.  6.  (C)  DCM called Presidential Advisor Tariq Aziz to request a meeting for Ambassador with President Musharraf as soon as possible and delivered strong talking points.  He said the U.S. was deeply disturbed by the decision to suspend the constitution and was disappointed that last night Musharraf failed in his speech to mention a schedule for elections or his plans to resign as Chief of Army Staff. This was a missed opportunity that should be rectified as soon as possible.  DCM also said the U.S. was disturbed at increasing reports of arrests of opposition leaders and human rights activists and urged that the government immediate remove blocks on the transmission of private TV news channels.  Aziz claimed the international channels had been shut off in error and said he would try to have them reopened soonest.  7. (S/NF) Post convened an abbreviated EAC where RSO noted that all was quiet, but that roadblocks were making travel challenging in some areas.  While the committee agreed there was no need to contemplate drawdown at this time, the DCM noted that Post would review staffing reports should such consideration become necessary.  Appropriate Mission sections are monitoring developments related to Ref A; we note there already is an increased police presence throughout the capital. (EAC reported septel.) PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4694", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/4/2007 13:42", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004701  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, KPAO, PK SUBJECT: HEAVY-HANDED IMPLEMENTATION OF PAKISTAN STATE OF EMERGENCY: ARRESTS AND MEDIA CRACKDOWN  REF: ISLAMABAD 4694  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary and Action Request: Post is concerned that the Pakistani government has used excessive force and no judgment in its implementation of the state of emergency and the Provision Constitutional Order (PCO).  On Monday, November 5, we recommend a call from a seventh floor principal to Pakistani Ambassador Durrani and a call to President Musharraf to protest these actions.  Ambassador and DCM have protested to senior Pakistani officials.  2. (C) The GOP,s ham-handed implementation, particularly the media crackdown and arrests of civil society and human rights figures seem destined to create concerns in western countries, and Post believes the USG should issue public and private condemnations to deter further restrictions of civil liberties.  Issues of concern include the continued blocking of international and local private TV news channels and attacks on the Pakistan Human Rights Commission and its members.  This cable reports on actions against the media and civil society groups.  Septel reports on post,s outreach to the opposition political parties to express concern about arrests of party workers, and to reiterate our commitment to elections on schedule.  End summary.  Lawyers/Human Rights Activists Arrested ---------------------------------------  3. (C)  Post has reports that as many as 80 anti-government lawyers, including prominent Pakistan Peoples, Party attorney Aitzaz Ahsan, have been arrested.  Ahsan was arrested at home the night of November 3 and was transferred to the Adiala Jail.  He is to be held for 30 days on charges of posing  a threat to public order.  His associate reported that he saw Ahsan and the seven former Supreme Court justices in jail, and all are fine, despite incidences of intimidation.  Approximately 80 other lawyers were also arrested, and bar association officials are still seeking an exact count. Ahsan argued the case against Musharraf in the Supreme Court and, while formerly a PPP stalwart, has fallen out with Benazir in pursuit of his own political ambitions.  4. (C) Approximately 100 lawyers held a demonstration in front of the Marriott Hotel on November 4.  This likely was as close as the group could get to the Supreme Court, which has been blocked off by police.  By all reports, the demonstration is peaceful.  Lawyers, associations across the country are planning a series of ad-hoc protests the morning of November 5; they remain unsure if they will be supported by the opposition political parties.  (See septel report on party reactions.)  However, PPP activists are reportedly being released.  5. (C) The November 4 meeting of the Human Rights Commission in Lahore was raided by a large police force wielding tear gas and batons.  Ambassador spoke with internationally-known human rights activist Asma Jehangir, who said that she was under house arrest in Lahore.  Grounds for detention include meetings with elements of civil society and instigating them to defy the lawful order of the government, credible information that Jehangir will deliver \"inflammatory\" speeches, and activities prejudicial to public safety and maintenance of public order.  Her 90-day detention order was issued by the Government of the Punjab Home Department, and she is entitled to appeal this order.  Jehangir is free to receive visitors (including the BBC) and is corresponding by e-mail.  The Ambassador raised her case at the November 4 MFA convocation of the diplomatic community to explain the state of emergency (reftel).  6. (C) Ambassador also called NSA advisor Tariq Aziz and then Punjab Chief Minister Chaudry Pervaiz Elahi to raise the house arrest of Asma Jehangir and the police raid on an executive meeting of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan in Lahore, where reportedly 70 human rights activists were arrested, including the elderly director.  (Comment:  We understand the director may have already been released, but we are trying to confirm.  End comment.)  The Chief Minister, who had spent November 4 campaigning in his home district of Gujarat, professed no knowledge of either incident and  ISLAMABAD 00004701  002 OF 003   promised the Ambassador that he would take action to release Jehangir and to prevent any further police actions against civil society organizations.  Post will follow up to see if this occurs.  Government Continues to Block Private TV News ---------------------------------------------  7. (U) As the announcement of the state of emergency occurred, the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) ordered all cable operators to shut down transmission of all national and international private news channels by 1800 on Saturday, November 2.  Only state-run Pakistan Television (PTV) remained on the air.  The GEO TV website was inaccessible Saturday night, but was available again Sunday morning.  8. (U) The Daily Times reported a group from PEMRA broke into the offices of a local radio station in Karachi. Karachi-based Business Recorder Editor-and AAJ TV Director Wamiq Zuberi informed us that his operations were being targeted.  AAJ TV was blocked from beaming to satellite, and police surrounded Business Recorder/AAJ offices in Islamabad and attempted to seize a broadcasting van.  The Ambassador spoke with Zuberi on Sunday morning to convey our concern and support.  She then raised his situation at the MFA briefing.  9. (SBU) PEMRA also shut down the APTN feed point which supplies all the international broadcast news organizations for filing their stories.  The international news organizations are working furiously to set up their own satellite uplinks.  PEMRA is also threatening Pakistani networks, and their correspondents are meeting contacts offsite. All major English and Urdu-language papers published normally on Sunday, after halting their editions to cover President Musharraf,s speech early Sunday morning.  10. (U) Shortly after the declaration of the SOE and the occupation of the AAJ offices, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) released a statement calling for President Musharraf to uphold his stated principles of free and open media in Pakistan and to end the authoritarian controls.  The CPJ Asia program coordinator noted that the Pakistani people needed to receive news from an outlet other than official government news services.  New PEMRA Order ---------------  11. (SBU) The GOP promulgated a series of amendments to the Press, Newspaper, News Agencies and Books Registration Ordinance and the 2002 Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority Ordinance to forbid publication or broadcast of terrorists or terrorist attacks; \"incidents of violence and conflict;\" any statements by media personnel \"prejudicial to the ideology of Pakistan or the sovereignty, integrity or security of Pakistan;\" any defamation or ridicule of government or military figures; or any material likely to incite violence.  Provisions of the new Ordinance permit the government to \"by reason of necessity or in the public interest\" to seize equipment or shut media for up to 30 days.  Pakistani holders of media licenses are also prohibited from entering into an agreement with a foreign broadcaster to sell or provide air time to a foreign broadcaster without permission.  Maximum punishment for violation of the broadcast ordinance is three years in prison and/or a fine of Rs 10 million (USD 167,000).  12. (C) Comment: Ambassador and DCM over the past few days repeatedly expressed our concern to the GOP that any imposition of a state of emergency must not include draconian measures to limit media freedom or involve the arrests of civil society figures.  Our concern was that the effort would not be \"surgical\" but would be badly implemented, with no political sense and excessive force.  We are seeking a meeting with President Musharraf to again relay these concerns and will continue to press for resumption of civil liberties, but will also demarche the Minister of Information to protest the restrictions imposed on the media.  End comment.   ISLAMABAD 00004701  003 OF 003   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4692|07ISLAMABAD4693|07ISLAMABAD4694|07ISLAMABAD4695", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/4/2007 14:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004702  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2017 TAGS: PREL, AEMR, AMTG, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, PINR, PK SUBJECT: MGPK01:SITREP 04, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD; PM ANNOUNCES ELECTION DATE MAY SLIP; AMBASSADOR CALLS OPPOSITION LEADERS AND HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIVISTS; STREET STILL QUIET BUT ARRESTS CONTINUE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4695      B. ISLAMABAD 4694      C. ISLAMABAD 4693      D. ISLAMABAD 4692  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  Prime Minister Shaukat publicly announced the timing for assembly elections may slip due to recent events.  The Ambassador called several opposition leaders and human rights activists to express her concern regarding the government's crackdown and our commitment to elections on schedule.  However, Pakistan remains quiet with no reports of violent or even large demonstrations, but arrests continued. END SUMMARY.  2. (C) In septel, Post recommended that a 7th floor principal contact Pakistan's Ambassador to the U.S. and call President Musharraf to raise the way in which the state of emergency is being implemented.  Post also requests press guidance on the government's crackdown on civil liberties, including the detentions of human rights activists and political opposition members, and the introduction of new restrictions on media.  3. (U) Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz announced in a televised address that, while the government remains committed to holding general assembly elections in the new year, the estimated time for those elections may slip because of recent events.  (Note: Although expected in January 2008, the Election Commission had not yet set a specific date for assembly elections.)  4. (C) The Ambassador made several calls to opposition political party leaders, media representatives and human rights activists today, November 4, to express her concern over the government crackdown on these groups.  Among others, the Ambassador spoke with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto.  Relieved that she had not been arrested, Bhutto announced that she intended to speak with President Musharraf and would arrive in Islamabad in a few days.  5. (C) The Ambassador also called Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi to protest the arrest of prominent human rights activist Asma Jehangir, and the November 4 attack on the HQ of the Pakistan Human Rights Commission in Lahore.  6. (U) Post is receiving reports that up to 80 anti-government lawyers have been arrested.  Approximately 100 lawyers protested without incident in front of the Islamabad Marriott Hotel, in an neighborhood near the Supreme Court.  7. (U) AmConsul Peshawar reports that the streets remain calm there.  Political parties were also quiet in North West Frontier Province today, although police prevented the Peshawar Lawyers Association from holding a press conference at the Peshawar Press Club earlier this afternoon.  Peshawar adds that the Association reportedly intended to call for demonstrations.  8. (C) AmConsul Karachi reports that attorneys are planning a demonstration at the Karachi press club at 1700 today,  and that a number of opposition leaders and attorneys have been arrested in Balochistan. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4692|07ISLAMABAD4693|07ISLAMABAD4694|07ISLAMABAD4695|07ISLAMABAD4702|07ISLAMABAD4713", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/5/2007 9:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004713  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2017 TAGS: PREL, AEMR, AMTG, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, PINR, PK SUBJECT: MGPK01:SITREP 05, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD; LAWYERS' PROTESTS GROW  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4702      B. ISLAMABAD 4695      C. ISLAMABAD 4694      D. ISLAMABAD 4693      E. ISLAMABAD 4692  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY. Despite growing scattered protests by lawyers, the streets in Pakistan remain largely quiet. The number of lawyers, human rights activists, and opposition figures detained by the Government of Pakistan continues to grow. During a briefing for the diplomatic corps, Musharraf appeared unfocused and defensive.  Ambassador raised human rights and press freedom issues and the UK High Commissioner pressed for an elections timetable. In response, Musharraf offered no assurances.  The GOP continues to block the transmission of some private TV news stations. END SUMMARY.  2. (C) Musharraf spoke today at 1100 local time to the full diplomatic corps. The hour-long monologue was rambling and highly personalized, and focused more on his reasons for the 12 March sacking of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry than for his 3 November suspension of Pakistan's Constitution. Ambassador raised USG concerns about media freedom and detention of human rights activists. In response, Musharraf suggested that Asma Jahangir, the head of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, was mentally unbalanced and should learn some patience. Responding to the UK High Commissioner for dates on a parliamentary elections and doffing his uniform, Musharraf offered no assurances.  3. (SBU) Lawyers, protests in Lahore and Karachi are growing, according to mission sources and broadcast media. Police used tear gas to break up protests of 100 lawyers in Lahore; they have now arrested approximately 300 lawyers.  In Karachi, police have reportedly arrested more than 100 protesting lawyers.  In Rawalpindi, approximately 50 protesting lawyers were arrested.  A demonstration of approximately 150 lawyers in Peshawar remained peaceful. In Balochistan, police stopped around 200 lawyers from protesting at the Balochistan High Court building in Quetta, and arrested thirteen lawyers, a representative from the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, and a cameraman from the Associated Press.  4. (U) An American citizen, Devin Theriot Orr, attending a Human Rights Commission meeting yesterday in Lahore, was detained along with up to 70 other human rights activists at approximately 1400 local time.  Mr. Orr has now been released.  5. (SBU) Round-ups of political party activists continues. The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) reports that as many as 25 district-level members have been arrested, as have a similar number of Jamiat Ulema Islam-Fazlur Rehman (JUI-F) and Jamaat Islami (JI) district leaders. The Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) reports that 500 party members have been detained in Lahore alone and that Javed Hashmi, the acting PML-N president, has been moved to Mianwali jail.  The leader of the Awami Nationalist Party (ANP) and other party activists have been arrested, as have leaders of the Pashtunkhwa Milli Awami Party (PMAP).  6. (C) Some of the religious and nationalist parties are vowing to join protests, but the PPP and the JUI-F have not agreed on a plan of action.  The Union of Journalists met 4 November and decided to hold off on protests.  It appears most players are waiting for a decision from the PPP on whether to join street protests by lawyers. We have been advised that Bhutto plans to come to Islamabad for a possible meeting with Musharraf to discuss a power-sharing deal, possibly as early as today.  7. (C) Office of Defense Representative Major General and RAO met with Vice Chief of Army Staff General Kayani and expressed US concern over the heavy handed tactics used in implementing emergency measures. They expressed deep concern that Musharraf has not confirmed his commitments to resign as Chief of Army Staff and hold elections in January. They urged  ISLAMABAD 00004713  002 OF 002   that Pakistan avoid actions that could jeopardize the US-Pakistan relationship.  Kayani took the comments on board, but did not respond.  8. (U) The GOP continues to block the transmission of some private TV news stations. Newspapers were distributed today with no problems. Phone service is working. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4692|07ISLAMABAD4693|07ISLAMABAD4694|07ISLAMABAD4695|07ISLAMABAD4702|07ISLAMABAD4713", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/5/2007 13:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004727  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 06, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD; ARRESTS QUELL PROTESTS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4713      B. ISLAMABAD 4702      C. ISLAMABAD 4695      D. ISLAMABAD 4694      E. ISLAMABAD 4693      F. ISLAMABAD 4692  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  The arrest of lawyers has quelled protests for the moment and the streets in Pakistan remain largely quiet. The Government of Pakistan (GOP) has dispelled rumors of a counter-coup against Musharraf, which fueled heavy losses on the Karachi Stock Exchange.  The Punjab Home Secretary told Consul General Lahore that he expects orders  SIPDIS to release tonight the approximately 50 human rights activists detained yesterday. The GOP continues to block the transmission of some private TV news stations, but phone service continues to work. All mission offices are operating normally. END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) As of 1600 (local time) the country is largely quiet.  Law enforcement broke up  lawyers, protests across the country, according to Embassy contacts and the media. Protests were violent in Lahore, Karachi, and Quetta, according to an Embassy contact, who said that lawyers were often beaten-up before being arrested there.  3. (U) The GOP firmly denied rumors circulating this afternoon that Musharraf had been put under house arrest. Musharraf publicly stated these rumors were &a joke of the highest order8 and continues to exercise control of the government. Musharraf was briefing the entire diplomatic corps when these rumors were circulating.  4. (SBU)  In its biggest one day loss, the Karachi Stock Exchange was down 4.8 percent in heavy trading today, nearly reaching the five percent loss threshold which triggers suspension of trading.  Losses intensified in the early afternoon upon the unfounded rumor that Musharraf had been deposed.  Most observers expect that the market will recover, particularly since losses prior to circulation of the coup rumor were in the 2-2.5 percent range.  Today's buying and selling was almost double normal volumes.  5. (SBU) The business community is watching closely US reaction to the state of emergency, and expressed concern that any US measures resulting in decreased government or private sector inflows would adversely affect prospects for continued economic growth (septel).  The US is Pakistan's largest trade and investment partner, and one of the top sources of remittances and foreign assistance.  Observers were also concerned that US reactions could affect votes on international financial institution assistance.  6. (C) The Punjab Home Secretary told Lahore Consul General that he expects orders to release tonight the approximately 50 Human Rights Council of Pakistan (HRCP) activists detained at their meeting yesterday.  This order would not apply to Asma Jahangir, head of the HRCP, who is currently under house arrest.  7. (U) Pakistani media is beginning to report that the US postponed annual defense talks with Pakistan.  A PPP Senator called the Embassy to say that PPP leader Bhutto was pleased with this announcement.  8. (U) The government continues to swear in justices in the provincial High Courts.  9. (U) The police stopped a printing press in Karachi from distributing a supplement to its evening paper, according to an Embassy contact. The GOP continues to block the transmission of some private TV news stations. Phone service continues to function normally. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4702|07ISLAMABAD4728", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/5/2007 13:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004728  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF CONVOKES DIP CORPS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4702  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: President Pervaiz Musharraf spoke November 5 to the full diplomatic corps.  The hour-long monologue was rambling and personalized, focused more on his reasons for the March 12 sacking of Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry than for his November 3 suspension of Pakistan's Constitution. The Ambassador raised USG concerns about the government's heavy-handed measures against civil society and the media; Musharraf railed against the head of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (now under house arrest) and avoided discussing the recent curb on the press.  Responding to the British High Commissioner's request for a date for parliamentary elections and for doffing his uniform, Musharraf would provide no schedule, only committing to \"implement the third phase of (democratic) transition.\"  End summary.  \"All because of March 12\" -------------------------  2. (C) Pakistani President Pervaiz Musharraf convoked the diplomatic corps in Islamabad on November 5.  Joined by several ministers/advisors, including Foreign Minister Kasuri, the head of Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) General Nadeem Taj, and the head of Military Intelligence (MI) General Nadeem Ejaz Ahmed, Musharraf launched an hour-long, rambling monologue before taking some questions from the assembled ambassadors.  Though Musharraf said he would reiterate the points from his late night November 3 speech to the nation, he instead presented a highly personalized case against Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry.  3. (C) Musharraf said he did not take lightly his November 3 decision to suspend Pakistan's Constitution, but the Chief Justice \"placed me between a rock and a hard surface.\"  He said the court threatened Pakistan's progress and development of the last seven years with its interference in legislative and executive decisions, using suo moto judgments.  He claimed there were now thousands of petitioners before the Court trying to receive special treatment.  Musharraf pleaded, instead, for unity among the three branches of government.  4. (C) Starting from before his March 12 suspension of the Chief Justice, Musharraf counted eight reasons for his decision: (1) he had no sense of justice, playing politics with the choice of Supreme Court panels and with vacancies on the Sharia Court and provincial high courts; (2) he violated judicial norms, suspiciously changing decisions and hampering privatization initiatives; (3) he inappropriately called on the chiefs of national intelligence agencies; (4) he pressed the President and Prime Minister to appoint his son to a civil service position; (5) he harassed civil servants working at his judicial chambers; (6) he entertained thousands of suo moto petitions; (7) he made fake reimbursement claims; and (8) he was driven by his ego. Musharraf concluded that his actions against Chaudhry were, therefore, justifiable and constitutional; in contrast, the Supreme Court's dismissal of the reference was not.  Too Soft --------  5. (C) Musharraf then claimed to have been too lenient with the lawyers' movement and the press.  \"Things have snowballed\" to the point that the Supreme Court now felt it could review his eligibility to remain president.  He argued that the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) had the constitutional authority to rule on this matter, and yet the Court entertained the opposition's petitions.  He said the Court had dangerously put the country in \"suspended animation\" and had \"semi-paralyzed\" law enforcement by threatening contempt of court charges.  Musharraf claimed he had sent numerous conciliatory messages to the Chief Justice, some of which were very public.  6. (C) Once assured of a negative judgment, however,  ISLAMABAD 00004728  002 OF 003   Musharraf realized that his only constitutional option would be to resign, which \"others convinced me against.\"  Musharraf revealed that, before making this decision, he met with all of the corps commanders -- \"my constituency.\"  He also reported that he met with senior politicians, provincial governors and chief ministers, and his cabinet.  \"This option was not for myself,\" but for Pakistan, he repeated several times.  Musharraf said that his demand that judges swear an oath under the new provisional constitutional order (PCO) was extra-constitutional; the suspension of fundamental rights under a state of emergency was not.  \"Bear with Us.\" ---------------  7. (C) Directly addressing ambassadors from the \"developed world,\" Musharraf argued that every country is different in its level of civil rights.  \"If this were an ideal world, an ideal solution would be possible,\" Musharraf explained concerning the arrests of political party and civil society leaders and the curb on media freedoms.  \"Are we supposed to let everyone do what they want?,\" he asked.  8. (C) The Ambassador strongly reiterated with Musharraf the USG's concern over heavy-handed measures against civil society and the press.  She further raised the detention in Lahore of 50 members of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, adding that it was \"hard to imagine a group less of a threat to Pakistan's security.\"  The Ambassador warned Musharraf that his internationally-recognized accomplishment of supporting a free and vigorous press was being undermined by the near complete suspension of the media.  9. (C) In reply, Musharraf ridiculed the leader of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, Asma Jahangir, as \"mentally unbalanced.\"  The Foreign Minister confirmed with the Ambassador on the margins that Jahangir was not at a local police station, though some male workers might still be, but was under house arrest.  Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi told CG Lahore that he had offered Jahangir his chef and suggested she enjoy the time at home with her family. Musharraf did not address the Ambassador's point about media restrictions beyond repeating, \"Please understand our society,\" implying that recent measures were acceptable to the general public.  ... And then there are the terrorists. --------------------------------------  10. (C) Saying some of his advisors described the Chief Justice's suo moto rulings as \"judicial terrorism,\" Musharraf argued that, at the very least, Chaudhry had stymied the government's counterterrorism efforts.  For example, the government has been in contempt of court, Musharraf said, since October 30 because the government had not complied with the Chief Justice's order to re-establish the red mosque or release terrorist suspects arrested without charge.  11. (C) In answering a question from Canadian High Commissioner David Collins on the government's plans in FATA and Swat, Musharraf promised, \"We will come down more strongly there.\"  Musharraf claimed to have opened another front against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, and said the government had the support of the majority in these areas, who he described as moderate and scared.  Parliamentary Elections; Uniform --------------------------------  12. (C) In response to a question from British High Commissioner Robert Brinkley on parliamentary elections and whether Musharraf would resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS), Musharraf committed to implementing \"the third stage of (democratic) transition,\" but noted that \"legal issues\" related to the PCO may cause \"minor changes\" to the previous mid-January target for elections.  13. (C) Comment: Since his reinstatement, the Chief Justice increasingly opted to challenge Musharraf's rule and executive-judicial relations by intervening on a wide range  ISLAMABAD 00004728  003 OF 003   of issues, from vegetable prices and zoning regulations to the voters list.  The Supreme Court's rulings on political issues, including the Nawaz deportation, Musharraf's eligibility to be a candidate and the National Reconciliation Ordinance appeared designed to keep the proverbial sword of Damocles hanging over Musharraf's head.  Today's harangue indicates just how much Musharraf has been preoccupied about the Chief Justice.  Musharraf's dismissal of USG and other international concerns about civil liberties, and his refusal to confirm dates for parliamentary elections and his resignation as COAS are troubling.  We have made the case privately and emphatically to GOP officials that the choice of individuals arrested seems designed to elicit stringent international condemnation.  We will continue to deliver the message that failure to follow through on these issues threatens to damage US-Pakistan bilateral relations.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4728", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/5/2007 14:27", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004729  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: CHAUDHRY SHUJAAT PREDICTS ELECTIONS WILL PROCEED AS SCHEDULED  REF: ISLAMABAD 4728  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain said that President Musharraf would resign as Chief of Army Staff as promised and would hold parliamentary elections on schedule in January.  Shujaat was surprised that earlier in the day President Musharraf had declined to confirm these decisions when briefing the diplomatic corps in Islamabad but said he would urge the President to make this clear.  Shujaat predicted the Provisional Constitutional Order would be lifted in two-three weeks and said the block on private TV news channels was planned to last only three-four days.  He dismissed USG concerns about arrests of civil society and opposition political leaders and urged us to concentrate on the important issues--elections and the transition to civilian leadership.  Shujaat insisted that Benazir Bhutto would not win approval of a constitutional amendment allowing her to serve a third term as prime minister until after the elections.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain told Polcouns November 5 that President Musharraf did plan to resign as Chief of Army Staff and hold parliamentary elections as scheduled in January.  He expressed surprise on hearing that Musharraf had declined to confirm this earlier in the day during a briefing to the diplomatic corps (reftel) and said he would call the President to urge that he make this clear.  According to Shujaat, Pakistan needed to hold elections and the President needed to shed his uniform in order to maintain credibility; \"we have promised this to several countries already and must keep our word,\" he said.  When asked why the Prime Minister had indicated that elections might be postponed, Shujaat said that PM Aziz and some parliamentarians \"want to keep their jobs a little longer.\"  3.  (C)  Shujaat brushed aside USG concerns about arrests of political opposition figures and human rights leaders saying these were \"necessary administrative measures.\"  Like his cousin Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi, Shujaat noted that most of those arrested were under house arrest and able to use their phones.  \"When I was arrested under a previous regime, we didn't have that luxury--we were sent to jail.\" He said that the media links would be restored soon as they were planned to last \"three or four days.\" But he urged that the U.S. concentrate on the important issues, which were the elections and the transition to civilian leadership.  4.  (C)  Shujaat confirmed that the government would present the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) to the parliament for its blessing later this week, but this was a gesture only.  Parliamentary approval was not required.  He predicted the PCO would be lifted in two-three weeks.  5.  (C)  After the PCO was lifted, the government would announce the date for elections and establish the caretaker government.  Without providing names, Shujaat said he was recommending a retired judge as the caretaker prime minister.  He expected elections would be held some time in January.  6.  (C)  Shujaat agreed that the political opposition continued to be in disarray but declined to speculate on whether Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto would support the ongoing lawyers' protests.  \"It is impossible to predict what Benazir will do,\" he said.   Asked about rumors Bhutto would be in Islamabad this week, Shujaat asked \"for a meeting with the President?\"  He then said that Bhutto would not get a constitutional amendment allowing her to seek a third term as prime minister \"until after the election.\"  The government should lift any remaining charges against Bhutto, \"as we agreed\" but could not confirm if the GOP had done so already.  7.  (C)  Comment:  Shujaat several months ago proposed the scenario that played out this week for what he called \"emergency plus\" to replace the Supreme Court and end the legal challenges against Musharraf.  He believes the PML should move towards elections now rather than delay, probably because they now control the government machinery that will best support his party's electoral chances.  While he was  ISLAMABAD 00004729  002 OF 002   clearly sincere in his support for proceeding with elections, Shujaat is not the only member of Musharraf's inner circle these days and the President's military/intelligence advisors may be offering conflicting counsel.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4727", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/6/2007 8:37", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004739  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/06/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 07, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: MIXED MESSAGES ON ELECTIONS; MEDIA RESTRICTIONS CONTINUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 4727  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: As of 1200 local time, mainly peaceful lawyers' protests occurring in Islamabad, Karachi, Peshawar, and Quetta. Following a conversation with Ambassador last night, Bhutto said that Musharraf would not commit to a timetable to have elections, doff his uniform, lift the state of emergency, or reconstitute the Election Commission. Restrictions on some broadcast media remain, and Public Affairs Counselor demarched Minister Durrani last night to reiterate our position that cable operators must immediately be allowed to resume transmitting news channels. Approximately 50 Human Rights Commission of Pakistan activists remain under house arrest in Lahore.  Pakistan papers highlight President Bush's comments and news that the Defense Consultative Group was postponed.  The Dutch announced that they would suspend aid to the GOP, but are evaluating how that might be implemented. All mission offices are operating normally. End summary.  2. (C) Benazir Bhutto called Ambassador last night after the PPP leader talked with Musharraf. Bhutto noted a pleasant and improved atmosphere with Musharraf.  Bhutto told Ambassador that Musharraf would not commit to a timetable to have elections, doff his uniform, lift the state of emergency, or reconstitute the Election Commission. Bhutto's contacts told her that Musharraf had made a decision to postpone the elections for six months.  This view is becoming more common and a range of mission contacts have told us that elections will be pushed back six months.  Ambassador relayed to Bhutto that holding elections on time was our highest priority and that we were concerned about Prime Minister Aziz's public remarks on Sunday that elections might not be held for up to a year. Bhutto did not mention any planned PPP demonstrations.  3. (SBU) Pakistan officials have publicly conveyed a mixed message about when elections will occur. Prime Minister Aziz said publicly on Sunday that elections might not occur for a year; yesterday he publicly said that elections would be held on schedule and that Parliament would be convened tomorrow (which clears the way for January elections).  Attorney General Malik Abdul Qayyum publicly said that assemblies would be dissolved by 15 November and elections would be held within 60 days. Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi said yesterday that there was no plan to extend the term of the elected assemblies, implying that elections would occur in January.  4. (C) Public Affairs Counselor met with Minister of Information Durrani Tuesday evening to deliver a demarche reiterating our earlier statement that cable operators must immediately be allowed to resume transmitting news channels. Durrani implied that the GOP is looking for a face-saving way out of the broadcast restrictions -- early enough that public dissatisfaction about the news blackout does not boil over, but with the restrictions in place long enough to make the point to broadcasters and the international community that the GOP will not be bullied.  Durrani said that if broadcasters agree to abide by the provisions of the amended broadcasting ordinance, they will be allowed back on the air. Public Affairs Counselor asked if there was room for negotiation in the provisions of the amended ordinance, but Durrani was noncommittal.  5. (C) CG Lahore reported this morning (local time) that the GOP has not lifted house arrest restrictions for the approximately 50 Human Rights Commission of Pakistan activists detained since Sunday.  6. (U) Former Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry remains under house arrest.  Through an intermediary, he publicly criticized the provisional constitutional order (PCO) as \"unfounded, unconstitutional, and illegal.\"  7. (U) All Pakistani papers reported President Bush's exhortation that Musharraf hold elections and take off his uniform.  Pakistani papers also reported that the US  ISLAMABAD 00004739  002 OF 002   suspended defense talks with Pakistan.  Pakistan's English paper of record reported that DOD Undersecretary for Policy Edelman canceled his trip to Pakistan and that \"Washington may also review its defense assistance to Islamabad.\"  8. (C) The Dutch DCM told us that the Ministry of Development Cooperation suspended aid to the GOP for the time being, but was evaluating how that might be implemented.   The Dutch DCM said he is seeking clarification from the Hague on how long the suspension will last and what it means; the DCM said they were directed to cut-off aid to the government of Pakistan, but 80% of their assistance goes to NGOs and 9% goes to multilaterals, so the restrictions may well be meaningless. The DCM said he hopes to continue supporting some projects. The Pakistan media reported the Canadian Foreign Affairs Ministry in Ottawa advised its citizens not to travel to Pakistan because of the imposition of a state of emergency.  9. (U) Police and GOP officials attempted to block distribution of an evening paper in Karachi yesterday (as reported reftel), but the management was ultimately able to distribute the paper.  The GOP continues to block the transmission of some private TV news stations.  Pakistan's paper of record reported this morning that people were lining up to buy satellite dishes to circumvent government restrictions on broadcast media. Newspapers were distributed today with no problems.  Phone service continues to function normally.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/6/2007 11:51", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004751  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: ECON, ETRD, EINV, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTANI BUSINESS COMMUNITY CAREFULLY WATCHING U.S. REACTION TO STATE OF EMERGENCY  1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Economic Section spoke with a wide range of contacts to gauge local business reactions to the November 3 imposition of a state of emergency.  While the  overall consensus is that it is too early to determine any long-term effects of the current crisis on Pakistan's economy, most observers pointed out that any U.S. actions to cut support to the Musharraf goverment are likely to have an effect on Pakistan's economic growth. If the crisis is not resolved quickly, any economic effects are likely to be magnified, as investors abhor uncertainty.  The Karachi stock exchange (KSE) lost almost five percent November 5, with record volumes at nearly twice the norm, based an unfounded rumor that Musharraf was under house arrest following a coup.  End summary.  2. (SBU)  Economic section staff spoke with a wide range of contacts, including Citibank (both trading and analysis divisions), ABN Amro Bank, American Business Council, Uch Power, and Marriott to see business community reactions to the November 3 imposition of a state of emergency.  Our contacts were concerned about how U.S. actions would affect the assistance, foreign direct and portfolio investment, and remittance flows.  The U.S. is Pakistan's largest trade and investment partner, with $1.8 billion in FDI and $1.45 billion in remittances to Pakistan FY2006-2007.  Pakistan's exports to the U.S. totalled $3.7 billion, while U.S. exports to Pakistan totalled $2.0 billion for the same period.  3. (SBU)  In its biggest one day loss, the Karachi Stock Exchange was down 4.8 percent in heavy trading today, nearly reaching the five percent loss threshold which triggers suspension of trading.  Losses intensified in the early afternoon upon unfounded rumors that Musharraf had been deposed and was under house arrest.  Most observers expect that the market will recover, particularly since losses prior to circulation of the coup rumor were in the 2-2.5 percent range.  Today's buying and selling was almost double normal volumes.  4.  (SBU)  Aziz Rahman, Vice President of Citibank, pointed out that U.S. actions over the next few weeks will set the tone for economic developments.  Highlighting the importance of the U.S. for FDI, remittances, and trade, U.S. policy on Pakistan can either make or break the economy. If U.S. and other international community policy reactions against the state of emergency are too severe, Rahman was concerned that investment and assistance, particularly from the U.S., might be diverted elsewhere.  He was not concerned about decreases in worker remittances.  He hoped that the U.S. would give the Musharraf administration a \"slap on the wrist\" and that Pakistan's role in the war against terrorism would mean that Pakistan would not be subject to more extreme measures. Rahman also believed that retention of the current cabinet was very positive and gave investors additional confidence. He also expressed concern that any change in U.S. policy toward Pakistan might affect U.S. votes on international financial institution assistance.  5.  (SBU)  Reza-ur Rahim, Head of Investment Banking at JP Morgan and American Business Council Vice President, reiterated that the business community is watching the U.S. reaction to the state of emergency. He asked whether the U.S. was likely to impose sanctions, recalling the negative effect on the economy of sanctions following the nuclear tests in the late 1990s.  Rahim was disappointed that Musharraf was unable to maintain the election timetable, but he opined that removal of the Supreme Court Justices was a postive move since the increased judicial activism had a negative effect on the economy.  He cited the stalled privatizations in particular.  Restrictions on broadcast media came as no surprise, since coverage of the May Karachi riots was too explicit in his view.  6.  (SBU)  Sakib Sherani, ABN-Amro's Senior Economist, told us that investors had already positioned themselves for bad news as seen by the large drops in the Karachi stock market last week, following rumors of an impending state of emergency. The next two to three weeks will be challenging but, barring massive street protests and a prolonged crisis, Sherani believes that the economy will not see any serious lasting effects from the current crisis.  He also believed that the U.S. would be forced to distance itself from the Musharraf regime.  ISLAMABAD 00004751  002 OF 002    7.  (SBU)  Sakib Ayub, in Citibank's Commodities and Currency Trading Department in Karachi, forsees some investment outflows from foreign investors but no overall meltdown. Local investors see that the situation is volatile, but the decision to maintain the current economic team in place means no change in current policy.  Stability is key to long-term performance.  He discounted the large KSE drop on November, pointing out that the market was down only about two percent before the circulation of the coup rumors.  8.  (SBU)  Murtaza Hashwani, President and CEO of the Hashoo Group, runs the Islamabad and Karachi Marriott hotels.  He remarked that they had lost significant business in the past few weeks, due to the rumors of a state of emergency and increased suicide bomb attacks.  He was optimistic, however, that business would rebound, commenting that Pakistani businessmen are accustomed to dealing with crises.  He noted that foreign businessmen are making shorter trips to Pakistan now, and blamed the attention given to the media crackdown in the U.S. and Europe which magnifies the problem and provides a disincentive to travel. Restoration of the independent electronic media outlets by the end of the week is key to getting business back to normal in opinion.  9.  (SBU)  Pervaiz Khan, CEO of the U.S. majority-owned Uch Power said it was business as usual.  His board is still comfortable going ahead with a $400 million expansion, regardless of the imposition of the state of emergency.  He thought the dismissal of the Supreme Court justices was a positive move since the large number of suo moto (cases initiated by the Supreme Court itself) had led to economic paralysis.  (Comment:  The Supreme Court had placed stays on a number of privatizations, and was hearing self-initiated cases on utility tariffs and drug prices, among others.  End comment.)  Khan emphasized the importance of free and fair elections respecting the initial timetable for ensuring continued economic growth and stability.  He also expressed concerns about the U.S. statements on the state of emergency and hoped that they would not discourage investors.  10.  (SBU)  Comment:  We note how carefully the business community is following U.S. reactions to the imposition of the state of emergency, particularly the Secretary's comment that the U.S. would review assistance to Pakistan. Possible sanctions were raised by several observers, perhaps because the economic effects of the nuclear test sanctions is still fresh and there is no interest in reliving that experience. We were also continually reminded of the importance of U.S. inflows to Pakistan's economic well-being, and the dangers that an overly negative reaction would decrease the amount of private inflows.  Given Pakistan's considerable current account deficit, and any large decrease in inflows from the U.S., Europe, Japan, or the Gulf would put Pakistan's continued seven percent annual economic growth and ability to provide jobs for the some two million new entrants to the economy each year in peril.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4739", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/6/2007 14:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004754  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/06/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 08, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: LAWYERS' PROTESTS CONTINUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 4739  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Overall, the country remains calm. Sporadic lawyers' demonstrations occurred through the country, some involving police beatings of journalists and activists.  The government agreed in theory to release 50-60 human rights activists in Lahore, but a paperwork glitch postponed their release until tomorrow morning. Human rights groups see this as a purposeful delay.  The PM chaired a cabinet meeting to discuss a timetable for elections; the National Assembly is scheduled to meet November 7 to discuss the political situation.  Benazir Bhutto arrived in Islamabad for a series of meetings and rallies.  Press curbs have not been lifted on transmission of private TV news channels.  All mission offices continued to operate normally.  End summary.  2.  (C)  The government is calling the National Assembly into session November 7, but it is unclear if they will be voting on the Provisional Constitutional Order (CPO) or will only be briefed on the CPO  Media report that Prime Minister Aziz chaired a cabinet meeting to discuss a timetable for parliamentary elections; no decisions have been announced as yet.  3.  (C)  Responding to international concerns, particularly ours, Punjab Chief Minister Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi informed PO Lahore that the 50-60 Human Rights Commission of Pakistan members currently under house arrest would be released on bail.  The magistrate has delayed the release, and human rights groups see this as intentional.  4.  (U)  In an TV interview today, Asma Jahangir of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan said that efforts to get Musharraf to remove his uniform and hold free and fair elections without delay is good, but not enough.  Efforts also need to target human rights abuses and the suspension of free media.  She is still under house arrest.  5.  (U)  Ambassador called on the Election Commissioner to urge that elections be held on schedule.  He assured her that he had no information to the contrary and was proceeding with electoral plans as soon as President Musharraf decides on a timetable.  Following the meeting, Ambassador gave an interview to CBS and Pakistan Television.  6.  (U)  Embassy sources report that all senior members of Pakistan's many bar associations have been arrested, leaving the lawyer's movement without leadership.  The total number of lawyers arrested in Lahore has reportedly reached 400 while \"hundreds\" more according to the media have been detained in Karachi.  The Karachi Bar Association is on strike.  At least 300-400 lawyers gathered at Peshawar's High Court, and other protest rallies were held at two bazaars in the city.  In Lahore, a small peaceful protest took place at the Lahore University of Management.  7.  (U)  CG Karachi reports that at least six journalists were arrested outside the Karachi Press Club while covering a pro-democracy demonstration; at least one was beaten by police.  There are reports of journalists and political activists (particularly Sindhi nationalists) being beaten in Sindh and Balochistan following gatherings at press club or bar association events.  Police have been posted at the Peshawar Press Club to arrest anyone going there to protest the CPO and journalists have been warned that any resistance will bring punitive action.  8.  (U)  In Quetta yesterday, the Pashtoonkhwa National Democratic Alliance (PNDA), an alliance of the Pashtoonkhwa Milli Awami party whose leader was arrested in Quetta, called a successful strike in the city.  A rally organized by the Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz (PML-N) was planned for this afternoon in Peshawar, although some senior leaders are under house arrest.  9.  (C)  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir  ISLAMABAD 00004754  002 OF 002   Bhutto arrived in Islamabad an plans party meetings for November 7, a campaign rally in Rawalpindi November 9, and a reception for the diplomatic corps on November 10.  PPP sources said the party has no plans to protest the PCO because \"we have not been asked.\"  Bhutto  reportedly plans to call a meeting of the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy (ARD) and may also meet Musharraf at a date/time yet to be determined.  10.  (C)  At a weekly diplomatic meeting of \"like-minded\" countries, representatives from Commonwealth countries were in agreement that the Ministers' Action Group (CMAG) would threaten suspension of Pakistan's membership in the Commonwealth.  Many representatives indicated that November 15 is a watershed date for their government.  The EC Parliament is reportedly \"reviewing\" its aid package.  11.  (U)  The Karachi Stock Exchange (KSE) recovered by less than 1 per cent after a nearly five per cent drop yesterday.  Analysts speculated that the market would recover since the majority of yesterday's losses was based on unfounded rumors that Musharraf was under house arrest. Yesterday's per cent drop was small in comparison to past market reactions to other major events in Pakistan's recent history.  The KSE lost 12.4 per cent after Pakistan launched nuclear tests in May 1998, and lost 7.1 per cent after Musharraf deposed Nawaz Sharif in October 1999.  12.  (U)  Moody's Investors Service downgraded the outlook on Pakistan's B1 and B2 foreign and local currency government bonds from stable to negative, which underscores how vulnerable Pakistan's economy is to political uncertainty.  Musharraf's political difficulties now appear to be a greater threat to investor confidence than previously.  A further ratings downgrade could occur if external capital flows decrease significantly or if a loss of domestic confidence led to a slowdown in economic activity.  Standard and Poors cut its evaluation trip short after the imposition of the state of emergency.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4754", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/7/2007 9:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004761  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/07/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 09, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIVISTS RELEASED; PARTIES PLAN PROTESTS; ARRESTS CONTINUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 4754  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Following Mission and Department intervention, 54 members of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan were released November 7 morning from house arrest, and charges against them have been dropped.  People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto, upon arriving in Islamabad November 6, has called for her party to protest the state of emergency and reportedly called off plans to meet with President Musharraf.  There were protests in several provincial capitals late November 6, resulting in more lawyers' and politicians' arrests.  It is calm in most cities but additional lawyer and political party demonstrations are scheduled for Islamabad and other cities.  Media curbs remain in place.  The UK has echoed our call on Musharraf to schedule parliamentary elections and to resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS).  Mission offices continue to function normally.  End summary.  2. (C) With Mission and Department intervention, CG Lahore reports that all 54 members of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, who were arrested November 4, have been released from house arrest.  The government has dropped all charges against the activists.  3. (C) People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto November 6 returned to Islamabad for the first time since she ended her self-imposed exile on October 18.  She has called on party supporters to gather in front of the Parliament at 1600 today to protest Musharraf's imposition of emergency.  Despite earlier indications she would meet with Musharraf upon arrival, Bhutto announced upon arrival that such a meeting would not/not take place.  Following Bhutto's announcement that the November 9 Rawalpindi rally would be an opposition rally, the GOP banned the rally.  4. (C) PPP National Assembly member (MNA) Syed Nayyar Ali Bokhari confirmed that Bhutto ordered her members to boycott the legislative session called for 1700.  The Ambassador is scheduled to meet with Bhutto at 1900.  5. (U) The opposition All Parties Democratic Movement (APDM) has called for country-wide demonstrations for November 9. All associated parties are set to participate, including Jamaat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F), according to its Senator Rahat Hussain.  The demonstrations would commence in all district capitals after Friday prayers.  APDM party leaders will confirm these plans at their November 8 meeting in Islamabad.  6. (SBU) In some cities (Gujranwala, Multan, Sargodha, Nowshera), lawyers continue to be arrested.  7. (C) Opposition Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf coordinator Saifullah Khan Nyazee confirmed press reports that his party's leader Imran Khan \"escaped\" from police custody. Khan was being kept at a house deputized as a \"sub-jail.\" Khan is now in hiding but is giving TV interviews.  8. (C) A new 9-justice Supreme Court met yesterday for the first time and overturned the November 3 decision declaring the emergency law illegal.  The November 3 decision had been made hastily by the former Chief Justice and six other justices just before they were arrested.  Today, the Supreme Court heard routine cases.  According to a Court source, the petitions by presidential contenders Wajihuddin Ahmed and Makhdoom Amin Faheem challenging Musharraf's re-election will be taken up (again) on November 12.  The hearing, set to last two days at most, will likely end in a \"dismissal of the petitions.\"  Post is watching this carefully since it may be used as a possible reason to delay elections.  No date has been set for the reconstituted bench to hear arguments against the October 5 National Reconciliation Ordinance (NRO).  Peshawar --------  9. (C) Late November 6, CG Peshawar reports about 200  ISLAMABAD 00004761  002 OF 002   supporters of the Pashto nationalist parties marched through Peshawar and burned Musharraf in effigy.  (The parties claim upto 700 protested.)  The crowd was dispersed, according to Awami National Party (ANP) sources, by baton-charging police.  Several ANP leaders were arrested.  10. (U) Today (November 7), approximately 15-20 lawyers have set up camp inside Peshawar's High Court, reportedly on a hunger strike.  Karachi -------  11. (C) The Sindh Home Secretary reported to CG Karachi that 489 lawyers and political workers have so far been arrested across the province for maintenance of public order; 336 of these were arrested in Karachi alone on November 6.  12. (C) CG Karachi also reports that a number of lawyers, including Balochistan Bar Association president, were arrested late November 6 in Quetta during a protest against the imposition of emergency.  Media Freedoms --------------  13. (C) Punjab Chief Minister Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi informed CG Lahore late Nov 6 that cable operators will be permitted to retransmit international news channels \"in the next few days.\"  Pakistani news channels, however, will reportedly only be permitted back on the air if they agree to abide by the new Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) code of conduct.  International Actions/Reactions -------------------------------  14. (C) UK High Commissioner Robert Brinkley advised the Ambassador late Nov 6 that UK Foreign Secretary David Miliband had called Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, Foreign Minister Mian Khurshid Mahmud Kasuri, and former Prime Ministers Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif.  Miliband's message reportedly mirrored that of the USG: schedule elections and make the transition to civilian democratic rule.  Brinkley was set to see Bhutto on November 7 in Islamabad.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4761", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/7/2007 13:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004766  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/07/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 10, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: POLICE TEAR GAS PPP MARCH; MORE INTIMIDATION AND ARRESTS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4761  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde for reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Police used tear gas to break up a Pakistan People's Party (PPP) parliamentarians march to the National Assembly.  Earlier, PPP leader Benazir Bhutto issued defiant statements at a press conference and PPP supporters clashed with police in front of PPP headquarters.  DCM met with presidential advisor Aziz to repeat the USG message on elections, the uniform and civil rights; he highlighted the Aitzaz Ahsan case that is of interest to several U.S. Senators.  Interior Minister Sherpao assured DCM that Ahsan was being well treated and could receive a visit from his wife. Small demonstrations and arrests took place across the country; plans are underway for more organized protests by various lawyer, civil society, and student groups. Ambassador has a 1900 meeting scheduled with Bhutto.  End summary.  2. (C)  DCM met with presidential advisor Tariq Aziz to again raise USG core concerns about setting a date for elections and Musharraf's resignation as Chief of Army Staff.  He also repeated USG demands that curbs on the media be lifted immediately and complained about excessive use of force by the police against demonstrators.  He raised the case of lawyer Aitzaz Ahsan, held incommunicado since November 3; we understand several U.S. Senators are interested in this case.  In a separate meeting, Interior Minister Sherpao assured DCM that Ahsan was being well-treated, was receiving his medicine and could be visited by his wife as soon as possible.  Protests --------  3. (U) Islamabad. Led by PPP Vice President Amin Fahim, along with PPP parliamentarians and up to 300 supporters, marched from PPP HQ to the National Assembly building.  They clashed with police who used tear gas to break up the march; there are reports that 45 PPP members have been arrested.  Earlier, Bhutto was defiant during a press conference where she stressed the need for Musharraf to schedule elections and resign as Chief of Army Staff. She warned if Musharraf did not take off his uniform by November 9, she would lead a protest march November 13 from Lahore to Islamabad.  Earlier in the day, several hundred PPP supporters clashed with police in front of the party's headquarters.  RSO/Islamabad described the police response as \"heavy.\"  4 (U) Rawalpindi. The Punjab provincial government and Rawalpindi police officials denied the PPP's petition to hold its November 9 campaign rally.  Officials said that demonstrations are banned under Musharaf's state of emergency and a threat of suicide attack exists in both Islamabad and Rawalpindi.  A PPP spokesman told press that the rally will be held as planned at Liaqat Bagh in Rawalpindi.  5. (U) Karachi. CG Karachi reports that a protest took place at the Quetta court area today where 16 lawyers were arrested for protesting the emergency rule and chanting anti-Musharraf slogans.  An advocate at the Sindh High Court reports that the majority of the lawyers at the Sindh and Balochistan High Courts and City Courts staged a strike today.  6. (U) Civil society organizations (CSO), non-governmental organizations (NGO), and political activists in Karachi held a meeting at the offices of the Pakistan Institute of Labor Education and Research (PILER) in order to mobilize the participants for a demonstration against the imposition of emergency and the PCO.  7. (U) Lahore. Approximately 500 students protested at the Lahore University Management while the police monitored the situation.  The police agreed that it could take place on campus, but said they would not tolerate it if the demonstration went into the surrounding neighborhoods.  8. (U) Peshawar. Jamaat-i Islami (JI) party announced today that is will hold protest rallies in Peshawar on November 8; in Swat, Dir, Malakand, and Buner districts on November 9; and in Abbotabad, Mansehra, Battagram, and Kohistan districts  ISLAMABAD 00004766  002 OF 002   on November 10.  In addition, the Awami National Party (ANP) is calling for \"anti-emergency\" rallies on November 9 in the NWFP.  9,  (U) Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) leader Imran Khan, now in hiding, released a video calling for protests against President Musharraf and the imposition of emergency.  Intimidation and Arrests ------------------------  10.  (U) High level party members of both the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) and the Jamaat-i Islami (JI) were arrested in Peshawar today.  11.  (U) The Executive Director of the Commission for Peace and Human Development in Lahore issued an unconfirmed report that the numbers of arrested persons has exceeded the space available in Lahore jails.  Because of this, an abandoned factory in the city's industrial area was converted into a \"sub-jail\" and currently holding approximately 450 people. The Home Department was forced to also declare seven other locations in Lahore as sub-jails, including homes of Qazi Hussain Ahmed, Asma Jahangir, and Munawwar Hussan.  The police reportedly also plan to shift some 300 prisoners to Bahawalpur as well to accommodate the growing numbers.     PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4761", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/7/2007 16:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004767  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/07/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: DCM MEETS WITH NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR AZIZ  REF: ISLAMABAD 4761  Classified By: Anne W.Patterson for reasons 1.4 (b),(d)  1. (C) SUMMARY: The DCM met with National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz for a 30-minute one-on-one meeting November 7. During the meeting the DCM conveyed reports that detained human rights lawyer Atizaz Ahsan has no access to family members and may have suffered physical abuse.  The DCM reiterated the USG position that GOP should proceed with elections as scheduled and Musharraf should take his uniform off.  The DCM discussed media censorship and expressed disappointment that despite assurances otherwise to the DCM two days ago, both domestic and international private channels are off the air.  Aziz requested USG assistance engaging Benazir Bhutto to keep her people off the streets in response to the government's actions.  The DCM responded that it is clear Bhutto was left with few options.  The GOP could allay her mobilization efforts by quickly announcing election dates and having the President resign as Army Chief. Aziz responded that this could happen in the next few days. END SUMMARY.  ELECTION DECLARATION --------------------------------------------- ------  2.(C) Aziz opened the meeting by stating he expected the DCM to bring a formal message from the USG.  The DCM responded by reiterating the formal and consistent message delivered over the past few days, including President Bush's clear statement.  3.(C) Aziz went into a long explanation that a delay in announcing the election date and the date of the President's resignation as Army Chief is due to his hope four of the previous Supreme Court justices will take a new oath of allegiance.  He went on to state the four were reasonable men and the GOP thought it was in their best interest to have them join the court. The DCM responded that the GOP made a serious error by not having President Musharraf announce a firm, prompt election date as well as his reaffirmation to remove the uniform by November 15.  Each day no announcement is made prolongs the crisis and seriously adds to the international consensus that Pakistan is faltering in its commitment to hold free and fair elections.  4.(C) Aziz was taken aback by the comment and quickly responded the election would be announced in the next few days and the President would soon remove his uniform.  When pressed on the election date, he said it would be some time in early February, claiming the originally scheduled January 15th date could not be achieved.  5.(C) The DCM provided Aziz a candid assessment of the Congressional reaction to GOP's delay.  While Aziz took this all on board, it was clear he did not appreciate the potential damage this could have on U.S. assistance to Pakistan.  AMB TO MEET BHUTTO --------------------------------------------- ----- 6.(C) The DCM informed Aziz that AMB Patterson would meet Bhutto later today.  In response to Aziz's earlier request for USG intervention with Bhutto to prevent PPP forces from engaging in demonstrations, the DCM said that it was clear Bhutto felt boxed in and said if the GOP wanted her to restrain her people from the streets, GOP would have to announce election dates and President Musharraf would have to resign as Army Chief.  7.(C) At this point, Aziz reiterated elections would be announced in the next three to four days and the President would resign as soon as the four Supreme Court members were added to the Supreme Court some time in the next 10-15 days.  8.(C) The DCM expressed great concern the GOP did not have the luxury of time.  The public mood and patience is quickly waning as the government delays the announcement.  The DCM also raised the issue that Bhutto's staff were not receiving regular briefings on the progress of the Karachi bombing investigations.  We noted the need for better communication from the GOP to Bhutto regarding updates in the  ISLAMABAD 00004767  002 OF 002   investigation.  Aziz agreed and said he would speak to the proper authorities about the issue.  DETENTION OF ATIZAZ AHSAN --------------------------------------------- ----- 9.(C) The DCM raised the USG's great concern for the welfare of Atizaz Ahsan. The DCM explained there are confirmed reports family members are not allowed to visit him in detention nor is he provided with needed medicines. He further stated he received unconfirmed reports that Ahsan had been physically abused.  The DCM noted that Deputy Secretary was contacted by Senator Conrad who said 30 U.S. Senators were signing a letter expressing concern over the imprisonment of Ahsan.  Aziz said he would share this with the DG ISI and try to open visitation to family members and diplomatic missions.  In addition to protesting Ahsan's detention, the DCM said it was painfully clear GOP had no appreciation of the international uproar Ahsan's arrest had created.  MEDIA CENSORSHIP --------------------------------------------- -------  10. (C) Aziz feigned ignorance on media censorship and said he would ensure international broadcasters were back on the air shortly.  He expected domestic media back on the air once they agreed to the new PEMBRA standards.  (COMMENT: He left a clear impression that he was only paying lip service to the DCM concerns.  We expect little progress. END COMMENT)  UNDOING THE PUBLIC'S PERCEPTION OF PROGRESS --------------------------------------------- -------  11.(C) The DCM raised the issue of excessive force by GOP security officials dealing with demonstrations and arrests. He noted the perception the GOP created by using heavy-handed tactics was undoing the public's perception of progress President Musharraf had made creating an open society and moving towards democracy. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4766", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 9:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004776  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 11, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: ISOLATED PROTESTS CONTINUE ACROSS COUNTRY  REF: ISLAMABAD 4766  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  The National Security Council is meeting to discuss the current political/security situation.  The National Assembly November 7 voted to approve the State of Emergency.  In a meeting yesterday with Ambassador, PPP leader Bhutto said she is ready to work with Musharraf if he schedules elections and resigns from his post in the Army, but would otherwise take the PPP to the streets. Musharraf did not commit to an election timetable in a speech to National Assembly members yesterday. Standard and Poor's downgraded Pakistan's credit ratings. Pakistan press report President Bush yesterday called Musharraf and asked him to hold elections and resign from Army post. Isolated protests continue throughout country.  Mission offices continue to operate normally.  End summary.  2. (U) The media reports that, for the first time since the state of emergency was declared, the National Security Council is meeting to discuss \"post-emergency\" plans, the internal security situation (especially in Swat) and plans for elections.  3. (C)  The National Assembly met November 7 and voted to approve the State of Emergency and congratulate Musharraf on his reelection.  The Pakistan People's Party boycotted the session, and other opposition parties had already resigned, so this was a rump session of pro-government parties only. Before the session Pakistan Muslim League parliamentarians met with President Musharraf and lunched with Prime Minister Aziz.  Contrary to press reports, Musharraf did not/not promise to hold elections on schedule.  Post sources indicate Musharraf said the state of emergency was not a long-term solution to existing problems.  Because \"terrorism is getting out of hand, I have no idea how long it will take\" to schedule elections.  4. (C) Ambassador met 7 November with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto (reftel). Bhutto told Ambassador she is ready to work with Musharraf after he schedules elections and resigns from the Army. Bhutto said she would take PPP to the streets if Musharraf did not honor his commitments.  Bhutto plans to continue with a PPP rally tomorrow in Rawalpindi and said that she would organize a march November 13 from Lahore to Islamabad if Musharraf did not fulfill his commitments by November 9. GOP is trying to stop the PPP from renting buses to bring PPP supporters to Rawalpindi, according to mission contacts.  The PPP held a party leadership conference in Islamabad today.  5. (C) Ambassador met 7 November with Attorney General Malik Qayyum (reftel).  AG Qayyum said Musharraf would not schedule elections until the newly reconstituted Supreme Court ruled on the pending petition challenging Musharraf's presidential candidacy.  Qayyum was still working on expanding the number of justices on the court, which he expected would begin to hear Musharraf's eligibility case next week.  He predicted elections would be postponed until February and that Musharraf would resign as Chief of Army Staff, but not on November 15.  Qayyum said that press restrictions would be lifted and that anti-government lawyers and human rights activists would be released within the next few weeks. (Embassy notes that it heard three different election scenarios from three different cabinet members the evening of 7 November.)  6. (U) Standard and Poor's Rating Services revised its outlook on Pakistan's long-term foreign and local currency sovereign credit ratings from stable to negative. S&P's announcement comes after Moody's Investor Services downgraded Pakistan's B1 and B2 local currency government bonds from stable to negative. Prior to announcing its ratings decision, a team from S&P's cut short its evaluation trip to Pakistan after the imposition of the state of emergency.  7. (U)  All newspapers and private TV news stations (that can be seen through satellite dishes) highlighted President Bush's statements following his phone call to Musharraf and the NSC statement that \"U.S. patience is not unlimited.\"  The government has restored access to one local private TV news station, the local affiliate of CNBC, which broadcasts  ISLAMABAD 00004776  002 OF 002   business (i.e., not political) news.  8. (U) The GOP is taking action to block the sale of satellite dishes, according to Pakistani press. In Karachi, police confiscated dish antennas; in Islamabad, Lahore, and Rawalpindi, police have told shopkeepers not to sell satellite dishes, according to the Pakistani press.  Lahore  9. (U) Police yesterday tolerated student protests at the Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS), the National University of Computer and Emerging Studies, and the Punjab University.  Students at the Beaconhouse National University today are scheduled to observe a \"black day\" against the PCO. Police yesterday beat several reporters trying to cover the LUMS protests.  10. (U) Lahore CG also said that the GOP set up six sub-jails because of over-crowding in prisons.  In a conversation with mission, Punjab Home Secretary said they are running out of prison space, but do not want to mix political detainees with the criminal population.  11. (C) Jamaat-i Islami (JI) leader Liaqat Baloch told Lahore CG that there is a (MMA) coalition meeting scheduled today to \"mend fences between the JI and JUI-F.\"  Karachi  12. (U) Karachi CG legal community continues to boycott the Sindh High Court and the city courts; a leader in the Balochistan Bar Association was yesterday arrested in Quetta after addressing a press conference and calling for demonstrations. Students and teachers at multiple universities yesterday observed a \"black day\"; small student protest reported near Consulate. The Sindh Taraqi Pasand Party (STPP) announced a protest throughout Sindh for 8 November and a strike for 9 November.  Peshawar  13. (U) Peshawar CG received reports of more lawyers arrested and demonstrations by the legal community throughout the NWFP on 7 November.  Students yesterday observed a \"black day\" in Peshawar and Charsadda by boycotting classes and organizing demonstrations. Peshawar CG said the JI is planning protests in Peshawar today; lawyers at the High Court continue their hunger strike.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 10:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004785  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DEMARCHES ELECTION COMMISSIONER   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary. On November 6, Pakistan's Election Commissioner assured Ambassador that he continued to prepare for parliamentary elections.  Legally, only the President has the authority to determine the elections date, and the Commissioner believed the elections would take place in January, more or less on schedule.  Following the meeting, Ambassador gave an interview in front of the Commission to CBS and Pakistan state television emphasizing our support for free and fair elections, as planned.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Ambassador paid a call November 6 on the Election Commissioner of Pakistan (ECP) Justice (ret) Qazi Muhammad Farooq to urge that parliamentary elections be held, as scheduled, in January.  She noted that President Musharraf in his national address November 3 and his meeting with diplomats November 5 had declined to announce a date certain for elections.  The Prime Minister had suggested that elections might be postponed for up to a year.  3.  (C)  The Commissioner assured Ambassador that he had received no instructions to delay the elections and he expected they would be held as planned.  \"The solution to the present political situation lies in having free and fair elections,\" he said.  We are in a \"blind alley\" and this is the only way out.  4.  (C)  Farooq said that the ECP has completed its elections plans.  The voter list of 80 million names was now complete, and they were accepting tenders for a project to place the names on the ECP website within the next 30 days.  CDs of the voter lists were being prepared to distribute to the political parties.  Instructions to election officials were being circulated, and plans to deliver the 430,000 transparent ballot boxes provided by the U.S. and Japan were being completed.  He thanked the U.S. for its continuing support to help the Commission oversee free and fair elections.  5.  (C)  The ECP had prepared a draft code of conduct that it circulated to political parties and NGO's.  To date, the ECP had received only a few responses, none from the major parties and none of which contained constructive criticism. The Commissioner said he had extended the date for responses and may do so again. The ECP planned to hold a meeting to discuss the draft code and then finalize it based on comments.  6.  (C)  Ambassador said we understood there may be difficulties in coordinating national and provincial elections.  Farooq said Pakistan planned to hold national and provincial elections on the same day, but they needed to synchronize them.  According to the law, elections must be held 60 days after an assembly is dissolved, unless it is dissolved before its term ends when elections must be held within 90 days.  The National Assembly is expected to dissolve when its term ends on November 15.  The Punjab Assembly will dissolve on November 24, the Sindh Province on December 12, and the Balochistan Assembly on November 28. The Northwest Frontier Province's Assembly was dissolved early on October 10, and the 90 day rule applies there.  So, the government needs to coordinate a time to hold elections that will comply with the law for all the assemblies, and this could result in a small delay (a week perhaps) from the proposed January 15 date.  7.  (C)  Asked about whether the security situation would impede voting, Farooq said the ECP believes there are only a few districts where they will not be able to hold elections, and he will propose that elections be postponed for 60-90 days (as outlined in the law) for these areas.  He identified North and South Waziristan in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas plus Tank in the settled areas as requiring postponed elections.  He thought that an adequate deployment of paramilitary security forces in Swat and Malakand would enable the GOP to hold elections there despite security concerns.  The majority of Pakistan's population lives in the Punjab and Sindh.  Farooq noted, therefore, that the problem areas represent at most 6-7 assembly seats and will not affect the overall outcome of the election.  8.  (C)  Comment.  As always, Farooq was pleasant and well-intentioned, but he clearly has no latitude to take  ISLAMABAD 00004785  002 OF 002   action without specific direction from GOP senior leadership.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4728|07ISLAMABAD4766", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 10:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004786  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: ATTORNEY GENERAL REVIEWS CURRENT EVENTS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4766      B. ISLAMABAD 4728  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Attorney General Qayyum told Ambassador November 7 that Musharraf would announce parliamentary elections once his own re-election was confirmed by the newly reconstituted Supreme Court.  (Note: In the course of the evening of November 7, we heard three entirely different versions of Musharraf's plans for elections from cabinet ministers.)  He predicted that a full, reconstituted Supreme Court would re-hear Musharraf's candidate eligibility case next week.  Musharraf would resign as Chief of Army Staff soon after taking the presidential oath, but probably not by November 15.  Qayyum promised action in the next few weeks to release jailed human rights activists and anti-government lawyers.   He confirmed that all three former Supreme Court justices who were responsible for restoring Islamabad's extremist Red Mosque leadership were now part of the reconstituted court.  End summary.  Elections and the Uniform -------------------------  2. (C) Pakistan's Attorney General Malik Qayyum requested to meet with the Ambassador late November 7.  He said that Musharraf would call parliamentary elections once his own re-election was confirmed by the Supreme Court.  This might be possible by mid-February.  The government currently has convinced nine justices to serve on the newly reconstituted Supreme Court and is currently attempting to lure two more. The full 11-justice bench would then hear Musharraf's candidate eligibility case, probably early next week, and would hear arguments for about five days.  3. (C) Only once Musharraf took the oath of office would he resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS), Qayyum claimed.  He warned, however, that all of these steps \"may not be completed by November 15,\" but believed the end of the month would be a reasonable target.  (Note: Post heard three different election scenarios last night (Nov 7) from cabinet ministers.)  Dissenting Voice ----------------  4. (C) Qayyum attempted to clarify his own role in advising against many of the government's recent heavy-handed measures.  He said that (former) Supreme Court justices under house arrest would be free to return to their home towns by November 8.  He claimed the house arrests were an overreaction to the Chief Justice's impromptu attempt November 3 to declare the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) illegal.  5. (C) Concerning the mass arrest of lawyers and human rights activists, Qayyum said Musharraf had approved these actions on bad advice from \"people more loyal than the king.\"  Qayyum claimed he was forming a list of human rights activists who should be released immediately and believed that many of the detained lawyers would also be released over the next week.  6. (C) Qayyum also promised that media restrictions would be lifted soon, including one local business news station that night.  (Note: Urdu-language CNBC, affiliated with MSNBC, is back on the air.)  Other local broadcasters would be up in the next few days.  Red Mosque Irony ----------------  7. (C) The Ambassador raised the October 2 decision by the Supreme Court, which reopened Islamabad's Red Mosque, reinstated its radical imam, and released some detainees who had been arrested under Pakistan's anti-terrorist legislation.  Musharraf, speaking to assembled ambassadors November 5, specifically referred to these detainees' release as evidence against the (former) Supreme Court.  8. (C) However, Qayyum confirmed that the newly reconstituted  ISLAMABAD 00004786  002 OF 002   Supreme Court now includes three of the justices who had a hand in this case.  Justices Nawaz Abbasi and Faqir Mohammad Khokhar originally opened the case on July 9 under the Court's suo moto authority; Abbasi with Justice Javed Buttar later ruled for the mosque on October 2.  At this obvious irony, Qayyum could only retort: \"You can't get rid of judges just because you disagree with some of their decisions.\"  Other Cases -----------  9. (C) According to Qayyum, the Supreme Court would tackle November 8 the contempt of court charges against GOP officials related to former prime minister Nawaz Sharif's September 10 deportation.  10. (C) Qayyum asserted that the National Reconciliation Ordinance (NRO) was a \"bad law\" and \"would be struck down,\" though he noted the NRO might be upheld only because new Chief Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar was originally appointed to the bench by former prime minister Benazir Bhutto.  Qayyum said the GOP could have more easily effectuated the same result by withdrawing Bhutto's corruption cases currently before the Punjab Accountability Court.  He said that there was no timetable for the Court to review the NRO, and, frankly, there was no rush.  11. (C) Alluding to the Court's suo moto review of detentions under Pakistan's anti-terrorist statutes, Qayyum revealed that the GOP was currently drafting a new law against \"anti-state activities,\" including terrorist acts, which would specify an \"acceptable detention period.\"  Qayyum, however, did not specify what that period would be.  Not Martial Law ---------------  12. (C) Lastly, Qayyum wanted \"to counter international misperceptions regarding President Musharraf's November 3 imposition of emergency.\"  He admitted that Musharraf's measures were \"extra-constitutional,\" but argued that the precedent for such measures had been set by previous Pakistani leaders.  13. (C) Qayyum claimed that the (former) Supreme Court was about to rule against Musharraf because Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry would not forgive and forget Musharraf's efforts to sack him on March 12.  Chaudhry had lined up anti-Musharraf votes, Qayyum was certain.  Because of the recent increase in militant attacks in the Northwest Frontier Province, \"the country could not afford to lose Musharraf.\"  14. (C) Qayyum said that Musharraf would legalize his actions.  The National Assembly had met late November 7 to approve a resolution supporting the emergency (septel); the Senate \"would meet soon,\" Qayyum stated.  He noted that Musharraf had not installed military courts, regulations or governors, and mentioned that Musharraf had ordered the Army to stay in the barracks.  15. (C) Comment: Like many other government officials, Qayyum is sharing his own speculation about Musharraf's plans regarding the election and the uniform.  Predictably, Qayyum showed no appreciation of the irony involved in replacing justices accused of abetting terrorism with the very judges who voted to put Maulana Aziz back in the Red Mosque's pulpit.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4776|07ISLAMABAD4785|07ISLAMABAD4786", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 11:37", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004789  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO SAYS SHE MUST PROTEST STATE OF EMERGENCY  REF: ISLAMABAD 4786 ISLAMABAD 4785 ISLAMABAD 4776 AND      PREVIOUS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto told Ambassador Novmeber 7 that \"I am ready to continue with the roadmap with Musharraf\" but first he has to honor his commitments to schedule elections and announce his resignation from the Army.  Without this, Musharraf had left her no choice but to take PPP to the streets. She plans to continue with a proposed November 9 rally in Rawalpindi and said that if Musharraf did not announce elections and remove the uniform, she would organized a long march November 13 from Lahore to Islamabad.  2. (C)  Comment:  The threat of mass PPP participation in demonstrations is Bhutto's best card, but she is playing a dangerous game that could trigger an even stronger counter-reaction from Musharraf.  As we have reported, Bhutto's ability to put people into the streets is unique. We can forsee a plausible scenario in which the Army, rather than the police, might have to take acton to quell unrest. At this point, it is not clear if the Army would support such a request.  It would depend on the size and scope of the demonstrations.  End Summary.  3.  (C)  Ambassador met November 7 with Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto at her Islamabad home.  This is Bhutto's first visit to Islamabad since her self-imposed exile in 1999.  Bhutto reported that the Ministry of Interior had finally called November 6 for eye witness statements from two of her supporters about the October bomb blast at her welcome rally in Karachi.  She went into some detail explaining several theories about who was responsible for the bombing and how it was carried out.  DCM briefed her on his November 7 meetings with Interior Minister Sherpao and presidential advisor Tariq Aziz; both promised to provide Bhutto with briefings on the GOP investigation into the bombing.  4.  (C)  Bhutto said she was ready to continue the \"roadmap\" on her agreement with Musharraf.  She did not want to send her people into the streets to protest the state of emergency and suspension of the constitution, but Musharraf is leaving her no other option.  During a meeting with the PPP's Amin Fahim and Rehman Malik, Tariq Aziz asked that the PPP not join the street demonstrations, but Musharraf is offering nothing in return.  He has not yet agreed to promises made in July to reconstitute the Election Commission, enact anti-fraud electoral reforms and remove mayors who unduly influence the election process.  Musharraf invited her back from Dubai for talks on the roadmap and then suddenly imposed the state of emergency.  \"I was prepared to meet with him but now I cannot do it. He must fulfill his promises first.\"  5.  (C)  Ambassador expressed concern about Bhutto's safety and that of her supporters if she proceeds with the proposed rally in Rawalpindi on November 9.  (Note:  UK High Commissioner delivered the same message.)  Bhutto replied that \"I have to go forward because it is announced and because I have pledged to fight the state of emergency.\" Otherwise, she said, \"I will be considered as being in cahoots with Musharraf.\"  If Musharraf does not fulfill his commitments by November 9, she plans a November 13 long march from Lahore to Islamabad.  5.  (C)  On her plans to organize other opposition parties, Bhutto said that she could, at least temporarily, work with the religious parties and the ANP.  They could united on a single goal of restoring the constitution but she would be wary of working with the religious parties in the long term. (Septel will report on meetings the PPP held November 7 with the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy group, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, the Jamaat-e-Islami and the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam parties.)  6.  (C)  Bhutto thanked the U.S. and the international community and asked that the USG keep up the pressure to convince Musharraf to announce he would hold elections on schedule and retire as Chief of Army Staff.  Ambassador assured her that we had and would continue efforts to convince Musharraf on both points.  We had been very clear in  ISLAMABAD 00004789  002 OF 002   our messages to date and would continue to make the case because elections and a transition to civilian rule were the only way out for Pakistan.  Bhutto confirmed that so far, Musharraf continues to be vague about those commitments.  She is concerned that he will delay elections; \"even a delay of five days\" would be dangerous because it will lead to even more delays.  7.  (C)  Bhutto said that she has not raised the National Reconciliation Ordinance with Musharraf, because she does not want him to think that she is concerned only with the cases against her.  8.  (C)  Expressing alarm at the judges being chosen for the reconstituted Supreme Court and provincial high courts, Bhutto said that all three judges who ordered the re-opening of the Red Mosque under the direction of Maulana Aziz had been returned to the bench.  Another judge appointed in Sindh had murder charges pending against him.  How, she said, can we restore democracy when the judiciary is in the hands of extremists and criminals?  Ambassador noted that she had just met with the Attorney General (septel), who confirmed in fact that three of the judges who supported the reinstatement of Maulana Aziz were being reinstated.  9.  (C)  Bhutto voiced growing concern that militant extremists were taking over district after district in the settled areas along the Federally Administered Tribal Area and in Afghanistan.  She said she had talked to the Afghan Foreign Minister and was writing to President Karzai because \"they know the tribes along the border that we can work with.\"  She suggested that attacks on entire villages just alienated the population; a more targeted approach relying on villagers who can identify which of their neighbors are causing problems would be more effective.  10.  (C)  She also mentioned that both Senator Chris Dodd and Congresswoman Sheila Jackson-Lee had called Bhutto November 7.  Bhutto was pleased that Senator Conrad has expressed interest in PPP attorney Aitzaz Ahsan's case.  DCM briefed her on assurances made by MOI Sherpao and Tariq Aziz that Ahsan was being well treated in prison, was receiving his medication, and could soon meet with family members.  11.  (C)  Comment:  Bhutto appeared relaxed and calm, despite the violent clash just an hour and half before between PPP parliamentarians and police outside PPP headquarters in Islamabad.  She is carefully playing her primary card--the threat of PPP participation in street demonstrations--with Musharraf in the hopes it will pressure him to announce a date certain for elections.  This is a dangerous game that could trigger serious popular unrest and an even stronger reaction from Musharraf.  As we have reported, Bhutto is the one politician with the ability to mobilize large numbers of people.  We can forsee a plausible scenario where the Army, rather than the police, would be called in to quell unrest. If that happens, it is not clear if the Army would agree to act as policeman or would repeat Pakistani history by turning on Musharraf.  Much would depend on the size and scope of the demonstrations.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 11:54", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004790  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: EAGR, ETRD, EAID, ECON, EINV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN PRESIDENTIAL SCIENCE ADVISOR PROPOSES ENHANCED AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH PARTNERSHIP   ISLAMABAD 00004790  001.2 OF 002   1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Dr. Caird Rexroad, USDA Agricultural Research Service Associate Administrator, met with Pakistan government officials and the scientific community October 31, as part of the ongoing Science and Technology Dialogue, a sub-group of the of the U.S. Pakistan Strategic Dialogue.  Ministry of Science and Technology officials proposed several areas of enhanced S&T cooperation.  The most concrete proposal is a plan to create a separate fund, under the auspices of the Strategic Dialogue, to facilitate research in biotechnology and agricultural science. END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) Dr. Rexroad, who serves on the U.S.-Pakistan Joint Science and Technology Committee, met with Dr. Atta ur Rahman, Science Advisor to the President of Pakistan and Chairman of the Higher Education Commission on October 31.  Dr. Rahman expressed frustration that to date, the Joint Committee has focused more on planning and discussion than facilitating value-added, high-profile joint research projects.  Pervez Butt, Secretary of the Ministry of Science and Technology, opined that in order to maintain momentum in the S&T partnership, a highly visible cooperation project was needed.  Both officials reiterated the Government of Pakistan's (GOP) desire for U.S. technical expertise to facilitate a wide-range of projects and specified agricultural science as an arena for enhanced cooperation.  3. (SBU) Dr. Rahman proposed a separate U.S.-Pakistan joint fund for agricultural research under the auspices of the Science and Technology Dialogue.  He pledged USD 5 million, to be replenished by the GOP each year, to a fund jointly administered by Pakistan and the United States.  Dr. Rahman asked that the USG match funding on a revolving basis.  Under Dr. Rahman's proposal, each nation would fund work conducted by its respective scientific community, thus keeping the funds \"in country.\"  The project would also include educational institutional linkages and scholarships for Pakistani students to study in the U.S.  4. (SBU) Dr. Rahman singled out industrial biotechnology as a key component of an enhanced agricultural partnership and proposed the creation of an industrial biotechnology center to coordinate joint research and development.  He expressed interest in both agricultural and pharmaceutical research applications, specifically the development of genetically modified (GM) crops.  Dr. Rahman identified encroaching water table salinity as a threat to crop yields.  He believes the introduction of GM crops that can thrive in more saline environments is key to maintaining Pakistan's agricultural production.  5. (SBU) Dr. Rahman would like an enhanced agricultural partnership to include other research fields, specifically aquaculture and vaccine development. The GOP is particularly interested in domestic vaccine production to prevent supply disruptions in the event of disease outbreaks.  The GOP is looking to identify and work with private companies, both foreign and domestic, to facilitate vaccine development and production.  Both Dr. Rahman and Secretary Butt proposed joint aquaculture projects, particularly the development of the potentially lucrative shrimp industry in the southern province of Balochistan.  In addition, Ministry of Science and Technology representatives suggested additional areas of cooperation, including greater linkages between U.S. and Pakistani universities and specimen exchanges between natural history museums.  6. (SBU) Separate from an enhanced agricultural research partnership, Dr. Rahman proposed the foundation of a US-Pakistan Engineering College.  The GOP has allocated USD 600 million for several national engineering colleges, all to be developed in association with other nations.  China and several European governments have reportedly pledged to participate.  Secretary Butt echoed this request, proposing the foundation of a joint US-Pakistan scientific institute.  7. (SBU) COMMENT: Our GOP Science and Technology interlocutors have often expressed a desire to see the bilateral agreement lead to more high-profile and results-driven projects.  They seem genuinely interested in projects that can be publicly branded as having U.S. support.  While GOP proposals are usually broad in nature, Dr. Rahman's request for an enhanced agricultural partnership was well thought out and included a funding pledge, pending USG participation and support.  8. (SBU) On the margins of the September Strategic Dialogue meetings in Islamabad, the GOP requested that we create a fifth sub-group focused on agriculture.  Post supports this request and is encouraged that the GOP has identified funding for specific areas of  ISLAMABAD 00004790  002.2 OF 002   cooperation.  Post recommends that relevant USG agencies consider the GOP request, as our institutional linkages with the education and scientific community in Pakistan continue to remain a bright spot in our bilateral relationship.  END COMMENT.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 12:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004791  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER SHERPAO DISCUSSES ELECTIONS, SECURITY  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C) Summary:   Interior Minister Sherpao defended the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) and told DCM November 7 that elections likely would be delayed until March or April.  Sherpao gave his personal assurances over the well-being of detained opposition lawyer Aitzaz Ahsan and agreed to look into reports that the government was expelling the International Republican Institute (IRI) and denying a visa to the local leader of The Asia Foundation. He expressed frustration with the political situation in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) and accused the USG of \"not doing enough\" to stabilize the area and to assist moderate groups. DCM promised to brief Sherpao on our security and development plan for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and said we would welcome ideas on how to improve the situation in the NWFP.  End Summary.  Elections ---------  2. (C) In a November 7 meeting with Interior Minister Ahmed Khan Sherpao, DCM reiterated USG concerns over emergency rule, noting that USG officials were led to believe this was a temporary condition, and that President Musharraf must quickly announce a schedule for elections and the date he will resign from the Army.  Sherpao defended the PCO, saying it was implemented because \"there was no way within the constitution\" to address the judiciary's alleged interference and to combat extremist elements in the NWFP, particularly in Swat.  Sherpao said that the GOP would likely 'delay' elections until after the Muslim holiday of Moharrum in January, and possibly until March or April 2008.  He also advocated for a \"code of conduct\" among political parties in which public gatherings are prohibited.  Sherpao did not know whether President Musharraf would resign as Chief of Army Staff.  Human Rights ------------  3. (C) DCM expressed concern over the welfare of anti-government Pakistan People's Party attorney Aitzaz Ahsan, who was arrested November 3.  Sherpao gave his personal assurances that Ahsan is well cared-for, is receiving his medicine; he promised to call Mrs. Ahsan to arrange for her to visit her husband.  Sherpao further assured the DCM that, contrary to rumor, Aitzaz's wife is not and would not be harassed by authorities. The DCM encouraged Sherpao to release the lawyer as soon as possible, noting that his detention has mobilized the international human rights community and is causing tremendous problems for Pakistan overseas.  DCM pointed to a call Deputy Secretary Negroponte received from Senator Conrad who informed him that 30 senators will sign a document expressing concern for the lawyer.  Upon the DCM's request, Sherpao said he would look into arranging a visit between Aitzaz and USG officials.  4. (C) Sherpao claimed to have no knowledge of a letter sent to the International Republican Institute (IRI) from the Economic Affairs Division (EAD) instructing IRI to close. The DCM remarked the State Department had chosen IRI to organize our elections monitoring team, which would be in Pakistan beginning November 20.  Sherpao promised to address the issue with his staff.  DCM inquired as to why the visa of The Asia Foundation's local director, Jon Summers, had been canceled. Sherpao said he was unaware of this and would look into the matter.  5. (C) Sherpao brushed aside concerns over allegations that police officials are using a more forceful level of violence against demonstrators.   DCM warned that this issue would reflect badly upon the minister, and the country's lawyers are \"up in arms\" about the situation.  Sherpao said former president Zia al Haq used to employ public floggings to clamp down on protesters; but did concede that authorities' use of force is \"a little in excess.\"  NWFP Security -------------  6. (C) Sherpao expressed particular concern over USG  ISLAMABAD 00004791  002 OF 002   political engagement in the NWFP.  He appeared frustrated with his party's inability to mobilize in the area, acknowledging its lack of support and the dominance there of the religious parties.  His cited a recent trip to his village, where terror threats against him prevented movement of any kind and left him feeling as though he had been held \"hostage.\" According to Sherpao, the security services now deployed have not been able to maintain effective control, and the governor needed to be replaced.  Sherpao indicated he is willing to turn to the opposition (read Benazir Bhutto) for assistance. However, he accused the USG of not 'doing enough' to help moderate parties in the NWFP fight against terrorism and asked the USG to \"come up with a plan.\"   DCM offered to brief Sherpao on the U.S. security and development plan for the FATA and said we would welcome ideas on how to help Pakistan improve security in the NWFP.  8.  C) Comment:  Sherpao is focused more on the security situation than the political one, and his comments on the election follow a pattern of contradictory remarks from party and government officials. His concern about the rapidly deteriorating situation in the NWFP, however, is well placed.  In Swat alone, Maulana Fazlullah now controls most of the district, and Talibanization is spreading into the settled areas.  Neither massive Army intervention nor negotiations, were successful and the GOP seems to have run out of ideas on how to address the situation.  With Musharraf focused on his political future, it is unlikely that the GOP will find solutions any time soon.  End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4789", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 12:38", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004793  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: NSA AZIZ ASKS USG TO CONVINCE BHUTTO TO CALL OFF RALLY  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4789       B. ISLAMABAD 4739  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz confirmed press reports that President Musharraf has decided to hold elections before February 14 and to resign as Chief of Army Staff as soon as the newly reconstituted Supreme Court rules on his own election.  We do not yet have Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto's reaction.  At this point, it seems as if Bhutto will proceed to hold a PPP rally tomorrow in Rawalpindi and that the government will attempt forcibly to prevent it.  2.  (C)  NSA advisor Tariq Aziz called the Ambassador November 8 to solicit the USG's urgent help in persuading Benazir Bhutto to call off tomorrow's planned rally. Ambassador recounted her conversation with Bhutto November 7 (ref A), in which Bhutto indicated she had been pushed into a corner.  Aziz said that such a rally would be \"dangerous\" and the GOP would prevent Bhutto \"from leaving home\" to take part in the rally. Ambassador said that Bhutto seemed determined to proceed, but that both she and the UK High Commissioner had expressed concern for Bhutto's safety. She stressed that putting Benazir Bhutto under house arrest would cause an international outcry. Ambassador said the situation could be defused if Musharraf announced a date for elections: Aziz said he might do so after today's national security meeting. Ambassador called Bhutto to relay the conversation, express concern for her safety, and encourage direct contact. Bhutto said they had suspended talks with the government until elections were announced and Musharraf agreed to take off his uniform. End Summary.  3. (C)   National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz called November 8 to confirm press reports that President Musharraf has decided to hold elections before February 14 and to resign as Chief of Army Staff as soon as the newly reconstituted Supreme Court rules on his own election.  Previously, Aziz had called Ambassador to urge the U.S. to use its influence with PPP leader Benazir Bhutto to get her to cancel tomorrow's rally in Rawalpindi.  NSA Aziz sounded unusually agitated and stated that Bhutto's rally would be \"dangerous.\"  NSA Aziz went on to say that the GOP could not ensure Bhutto's safety during the event.  4. (C) Responding to Ambassador's question about whether the GOP intended to arrest Bhutto, NSA Aziz said that the GOP would put Bhutto under house arrest if she did not call off tomorrow's scheduled demonstration. Aziz said that Musharraf was \"very upset\" about Bhutto's plan to demonstrate against him.  Aziz also said Friday's rally would undermine his personal credibility since he brokered last month's Bhutto-Musharraf deal. Aziz went on to say that any rapprochement between Musharraf and Bhutto would be \"thrown out the window\" if she went ahead with tomorrow's rally. He stressed the USG involvement in brokering an arrangement between Benazir and Musharraf and said it would all be wasted.  5. (C) Following Aziz's request for U.S. assistance, Ambassador told Aziz that in recent conversations with Bhutto, the PPP leader noted an improved atmosphere with Musharraf (ref B). Ambassador told Aziz, however, that Musharraf had not yet responded to Bhutto's requests to set a date for elections, resign from his Army post, lift the state of emergency, and reconstitute the Election Commission. Ambassador told Aziz it was not the USG's place to ask Bhutto to cancel the rally, but she (and the UK High Commissioner) had certainly expressed concern about her safety and security, and urged her to take this into account. Ambassador also relayed that Bhutto felt as if she had been excoriated by the Pakistani press, and she and her supporters had few remaining political options.  6. (C) Ambassador stressed that Musharraf might diffuse the situation by announcing a date for elections.  NSA advisor responded by saying that even if such a date were announced, \"it might slip,\" but said Musharraf might do so after today's National Security Council meeting. Aziz said he would be back in touch.  ISLAMABAD 00004793  002 OF 002    7. (C) Ambassador called Bhutto to recount the conversation and urge direct contact with the government.  Bhutto said that a number of PPP activists were being arrested throughout the country and that the party had advised her to cut off contact with the government until elections were announced and Musharraf resigned from the Army. Bhutto replied to Ambassador's concerns about her safety by saying that she was going to hold a rally, not a procession, and that the Pakistan Muslim League leader and Chief Minister of the Punjab holds large rallies frequently and without impediment. She said she needed jamming equipment from the government and that there was no reason she could not hold a rally safely if the government were cooperative. She said (as she did the previous night) that she had been backed into a corner politically and had no choice but to proceed. Ambassador recounted to Bhutto that Aziz had told her that an announcement of elections might be forthcoming, but she did not know what it would say. Bhutto thanked President Bush for his statement November 7.  8. (C) Comment:  We do not yet have Bhutto's reaction to Musharraf's decision.  As of now, it appears as if Bhutto is planning to proceed with the rally and that the government is planning to block it by force, including prohibiting Bhutto from leaving her home, to prevent it. She, too, is playing a dangerous game, but she has been criticized in the local press and by her party for being too close to the USG and for being too much in bed with Musharraf. Ambassador asked Tariq Aziz if the government would get to a scenario in which the Army would have to be called out to quell unrest and he said \"no, not the Army\" with some disquiet in his voice.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4578", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 13:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004794  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/17/2017 TAGS: ENRG, ETTC, PREL, PK, IN, IR SUBJECT: PAKISTAN, INDIA APPEAR TO HAVE AGREED ON PRICE FORMULA; AGREEMENT POSSIBLE NOVEMBER 9  REF: ISLAMABAD 4578  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Peter W. Bodde, reasons 1.5 (b) and (d)  1. (C)  Summary:  Pakistan and Iran are very close to signing a bilateral gas pipeline deal, now that the gas pricing issue is resolved, according to November 8 press reports.  Pakistan has also reportedly won the ability to resell Iranian gas to both India and Pakistan.  Imported Iranian gas would be approximately half the price of gas produced in Pakistan.  A high-level GOP delegation was dispatched to Teheran to sign an agreement before its return November 10, following GOP approval of the conditions, according to the press.  Our contact at the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources acknowledged that a high-level delegation was in Teheran but could not confirm or deny whether an agreement would be signed. As this is the fourth negotiating session since late July, the fact that a Secretary was dispatched to Teheran during the state of emergency is indicative of the importance Pakistan places on finalizing an agreement with Iran.  End summary.  2.  (U)  November 8 press reports indicate that Pakistan and Iran have reached agreement on a pricing formula for gas sold from the potential $3.6 billion Iran-Pakistan gas pipeline. We understand that both sides have agreed to a gas pricing mechanism based on the Japanese crude and LNG benchmark. Both sides also agreed to revisit the pricing mechanism in 2015. Press reports also indicate that Iran was intent on including a clause to review gas pricing, and that Pakistan appears to have won the right to resell gas to both India and China. Pakistan and Iran are expected to finalize the gas deal in Tehran on November 9.  3.  (U)  Pakistan has informed Iran that it is ready to import five billion cubic feet of gas per day through a 56 inch pipeline, according press reports.  Pakistan plans to build a LNG facility at the Gwadar port where the proposed pipeline from the South Pars field to the Iranian border and then across Balochistan is likely to terminate.  According to press reports, the the piped gas could be converted into LNG for export to western China via a proposed rail line.  4.  (C)  We spoke with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources Senior Joint Secretary Jahangir Khan November 8, who confirmed that the senior-level delegation is in Tehran and plans to return November 10.  He cited on-going negotiations as why he could neither confirm nor deny today's press reports.  The Pakistani delegation, headed by Secretary of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources Furrukh Qayyum, left for Teheran shortly after the pipeline agreement was approved by the GOP Cabinet's Economic Coordinating Committee to seal the gas sales purchase agreement (GPSA) with the Iranian authorities.  Khan is well aware of our position regarding conclusion of any gas deal with Iran and possible pipeline construction.  5.  (C) Comment:  Given that the Secretary was permitted to travel during the state of emergency, Pakistan is placing great importance on moving forward with this deal.  Pakistan and Iran have been edging closer during four negotiating sessions over the past few months, and the pricing issue is one of the last major stumbling blocks (although there are still issues to be worked out).  Under the proposed gas deal,  we have been told that gas imported from Iran would cost approximately half the price of locally-produced gas, making this deal -- particularly without the added complication of India -- particularly attractive.  The GOP is not factoring in pipeline construction or added security costs for construction across Balochistan in these price calculations, but may hope to recoup its share of construction and security costs through gas sales to India and China.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4694", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 13:42", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004795  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: RECONSTITUTED SUPREME COURT AND PROVINCIAL HIGH COURTS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4694  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  President Musharraf has reportedly decided that, before he can schedule parliamentary elections, the newly constituted Supreme Court must rule on the pending case challenging his own election.  Under Musharraf's November 3 Provisional Constitution Order (PCO), he fired all Supreme Court and provincial High Court justices.  They now must take a loyalty oath or face termination and possible arrest. Despite significant resistance, the government quickly replenished most court benches. To date, there are nine members of the Supreme Court, and the Attorney General is seeking an additional two justices.  An eleven-member Supreme Court bench will then take up the Musharraf eligibility case next week.  End summary.  Report Card -----------  2. (C) Twelve of 17 former Supreme Court justices refused to take the oath under the November 3 PCO.  To date, five former justices did agree to take the oath and are now part of a reconstituted Supreme Court that includes nine justices. Attorney General Malik Qayyum told Ambassador November 7 (septel) that his goal was to increase the court to eleven members.  He is even reaching out to former members of the Court who voted in favor of reopening the Islamabad Red Mosque under the leadership of an extremist imam (septel). This new Court met for the first time November 6.  Qayyum expects an eleven-member court next week to begin hearing the pending case challenging Musharraf's eligibility as a presidential candidate.  Musharraf reportedly has decided that he cannot schedule parliamentary elections until the Court rules on his own fate.  3.  (C)  However, the scene is different at the provincial level.  At the Sindh High Court, only three of the 27 judges, including Chief Justice Sabihuddin Ahmed, refused to pledge allegiance.  In Peshawar, four of the 13 judges refused to take the oath, including Chief Justice Tariq Pervez Khan. The most surprising announcement took place at the Balochistan High Court where all five of the sitting judges took the oath.  In Lahore, it appears that 12 of the 31-member Punjab High Court have refused to join the new bench.  November 3 ----------  4. (U) On the evening of Saturday, November 3, seven of the Supreme Court justices, in an impromptu move, unanimously rejected the PCO.  Their decision ordered top GOP officials, including Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz and the Chief of Army Staff (and President) Pervez Musharraf, to stand down. Shortly after the decision was declared, GOP officials on hand informed the Chief Justice that his services were \"no longer needed\" and placed him under arrest.  Musharraf personally swore in Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, fourth in line on the Supreme Court, as the new Chief Justice.  Eight justices on the new Court overturned Chaudhry's November 3 decision against the PCO.  Trying to Maintain Discipline -----------------------------  7. (U) During their period of house arrest, former Chief Justice Chaudhry attempted November 6 to rally his \"troops\" by calling a group of lawyers from the Islamabad Bar Association via cell phone.  He urged them to \"rise up\" and save the constitution.  The Justice told his followers that he would soon launch his next phase of the struggle for judiciary independence upon his release in attempts to recreate the successful protest campaign carried out by the country's lawyers against Musharraf's first dismissal of the Chief Justice.  Authorities temporarily suspended cellphone coverage in parts of Islamabad, but these actions did not prevent several dozen lawyers from protesting in the city's court complex upon hearing Chaudhry's call.  (Note: The protest lasted roughly 30 minutes and ended peacefully.)   ISLAMABAD 00004795  002 OF 002   8. (C) Comment:  Musharraf's efforts to reinstate the Supreme Court with as many former justices as possible is an attempt to give his new court credibility that it will likely never have.  Despite his success in re-filling the Supreme Court and provincial High Court benches, the judicial system is grinding to a halt because many lawyers have been arrested and bar associations across the country are going on strike to protest the state of emergency.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4728", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 13:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004796  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: NATIONAL ASSEMBLY APPROVES EMERGENCY  REF: ISLAMABAD 4728  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Post has confirmed that Pakistan's National Assembly approved November 7 Musharraf's imposition of emergency.  However, contrary to some media reports, Musharraf did not/not commit to holding elections on time when he met with his coalition legislators earlier in the day.  Instead, he blamed terrorism for any delay, though elections would be \"as soon as possible.\" End summary.  Likely Last Session -------------------  2. (C) Pakistan Muslim League (PML) parliamentarian Donya Aziz confirmed late November 7 that the National Assembly was brought back in to session that evening in what may be its last meeting before its scheduled November 15 dissolution. Pakistan's lower house approved two measures: (1) supporting President Musharraf's November 3 imposition of emergency and (2) congratulating him on his October 6 re-election.  With Pakistan's Constitution in abeyance under the Provisional Constitution Order (PCO), the two legislative houses did not have to vote on the state of emergency in a joint sitting as would have otherwise been required.  Parliamentary Elections -----------------------  3. (C) Aziz and fellow National Assembly member Riaz Fatyana (independent, but aligned with the PML) confirmed that coalition legislators met earlier in the day with Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz and then President Pervez Musharraf. According to both Aziz and Fatyana, when they specifically asked Musharraf about scheduling parliamentary elections, Musharraf would only commit to \"elections as soon as possible.\"  Aziz and Fatyana both recounted how Musharraf then blamed terrorism for any election delay: \"Terrorism is getting out of hand, and I have no idea how long it will take (to bring it under control).\"  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4776", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/8/2007 14:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004797  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/08/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 12, ELECTIONS TO BE HELD BY FEB 15; BHUTTO TO \"RISK LIFE\" FOR RALLY  REF: ISLAMABAD 04776  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: President Musharraf announced today that national elections would take place before February 15 and that he would resign as Chief of Army Staff when the newly constituted Supreme Court rules on his election case.  Bhutto exhorted supporters to join a PPP rally in Rawalpindi November 9 despite government efforts to block it.  The Ministry of Information announced today that it would restore eight to ten networks, as long as they agree to a strenuous code of conduct allowing for government content control. Major TV channels have still refused to comply with the code of conduct.  All Mission offices continue to operate normally.  End summary.  Elections by February 14 ------------------------  2. (C) National Security Advisor, Tariq Aziz confirmd media reports that President Musharraf has decided to hold elections by February 15.  Further, Musharraf will resign as Chief of Army Staff after the newly reconstituted Supreme Court rules on the pending case regarding his eligibility for the election he won on October 6.  PPP Rally to Proceed --------------------  3. (U) During a press conference, Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto exhorted supporters and others who opposed the state of emergency to participate in a planned PPP rally in Rawalpindi on November 9 despite efforts by the government to block it.  Bhutto stated that she would \"risk her life\" by leading the rally.  Ref A reports on GOP requests that the U.S. convince Bhutto to stop the rally or face house arrest.  PPP contacts say the rally will proceed despite reports of suicide bombers in Islamabad.  The PPP claims that the GOP is not providing necessary support in the form of either transportation or security for tomorrow's gathering.  4. (C) Ghafoor Haidri, an official within Jamaat-i Islami (JI), confirms Geo TV reporting that the police did not allow JI members inside Mansoorah to hold a Mutahida Majlis Amal (MMA religious parties group) Supreme Council meeting. Because of this refusal, Haidri and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUIF) leader Mauluan Fazlur Rehman, are being forced to hold their meeting in an undisclosed location.  Qazi Hussain Ahmed, the leader of JI, will not be in attendance in that he is currently under house arrest in Mansoorah.  Consulate Reports -----------------  5. Karachi: Courts are proceeding despite a lawyers' boycott.  At this time, protests by the lawyers, political parties, journalists, or civil society organizations are not expected.  6. Punjab/Lahore:  Approximately 150 PPP members were arrested in Lahore and another 400 in other Punjab cities following a series of party rallies in Punjab province. According to sources, the numbers are likely to increase significantly tonight in an attempt to ruin tomorrow's PPP rally scheduled in Rawalpindi.  7. Peshawar: Although roughly 1000 protesters were expected, JI managed to recruit only 350 protesters today in a peaceful demonstration.  A second JI demonstration is expected in the Northwest Frontier Province tomorrow.  Possible Media Restoration --------------------------  8. After several days of only the government-run PTV on the air and the wily Geo TV network skirting the system, the Minister of Information announced that 8 to 10 channels will once again be able for viewing, including Business Plus, CNBC, BBC, CNN, and Al-Jazeera. However, these channels must agree to a strenuous government-imposed code of conduct, leaving several of the more popular stations, including Dawn and AAJ, to make the choice of government-controlled content  ISLAMABAD 00004797  002 OF 002   or more time off the air.  As of 1830 local time, only CNBC is being distributed.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4797", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2007 8:31", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004805  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PINR, KFLO, CASC, AMGT, AEMR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 13, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO UNDER HOUSE ARREST  REF: ISLAMABAD 4797  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto is under virtual house arrest.  Ambassador called Bhutto to urge her to consider the consequences of pushing for demonstrations and to express our concerns regarding further political polarization and her own personal safety. The police have arrested hundreds of PPP supporters and blocked roads to Rawalpindi in an effort to block the rally. The GOP restored distribution of international TV news channels late on November 8 but again blocked their transmission on November 9.  Pakistan's religious party coalition has called for a November 14 National Consultative Meeting of all opposition parties, including the PPP. Seventeen people have been charged with sedition in Karachi, charged with making anti-government statements.  There was limited violence in some cities last night.  Mission operations continue normally.   End summary.  2. (C) Several hundred capital police have surrounded People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto's Islamabad home. National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz clarified in a November 9 phone call to the Ambassador that the police had been ordered not to execute an arrest order until she tried to leave the house.  3. (U) Up to 1,000 PPP supporters have been arrested across the country, and police blocked roads to Rawalpindi in an attempt to block the PPP's planned demonstration, scheduled for 1300 local time. According to RSO sources, approximately 5000 police are controlling access in and around Rawalpindi. There are also now police checkpoints around Islamabad International Airport; only ticketed passengers are being allowed to proceed to the airport.  Roads between the Northwest Frontier Province and Rawalpindi are also blocked  4. (C) The Ambassador called Bhutto November 8 and November 9 to urge her to consider the consequences of pushing for demonstrations and to express our concerns regarding further political polarization and her own personal safety.  Bhutto replied that Musharraf's promise to resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS) is still too vague and that parliamentary elections should be held in January.  She said the roundup of party supporters, including one instance of a family and their guests being jailed, left her little choice but to proceed with the rally.  5. (C) The religious parties block, Muttahida Majlis-e-Alam (MMA), met November 8 night and decided to call a November 14 National Consultative Meeting of all opposition parties, including PPP.  The MMA is demanding that Musharraf lift the state of emergency, restore judges, announce parliamentary elections, and doff his uniform.  They also threatened a country-wide protest November 16.  7. (C) Police and Rangers broke up a November 8 demonstration at Karachi City Courts by approximately 100 lawyers; they were protesting the filing of sedition charges against 17 lawyers, politicians and businessmen.  The Sindh High Court Bar Association and the Balochistan Bar Association, separately, decided November 8 to continue their boycotts of the courts.  8. (C) CG Lahore scheduled to meet November 9 afternoon Asma Jahangir, leader of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan.  9. (U) Limited violence was reported during the November 8 Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) demonstration in Peshawar; JI will hold a demonstration today in Malakand.  10. (U) The government lifted distribution blocks on international cable TV news networks late on November 8 but reinstated them the morning of November 9.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4805", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2007 10:40", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004809  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 14, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO BLOCKED IN FRONT OF HOME  REF: ISLAMABAD 4805  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto attempted to leave her Islamabad home November 9, 1400 hours (local).  She remains in her car, surrounded by 40-plus PPP supporters on foot.  Bhutto talked her way through the first barricade but has been stopped at a second one.  As of 1500 hours, Bhutto had only progressed about 100 yards from the house.  She is reportedly blocked on all sides: between two barbed wire blockades, with five lines deep of police in front, an armored personnel carrier on their right, and supporters clashing with police on their left.  A magistrate has entered Bhutto's property, but has not been able to reach Bhutto in her car in order to serve her with a warrant, so claimed a high-level PPP source on the scene.  2. (C) RSO sources report that Rawalpindi is quiet because police have been successful in blocking roads in and around the city.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4811", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2007 11:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004811  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PREL, KDEM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN:  MUSHARRAF DUAL OFFICES BACKGROUNDER  Classified By: Ambassador Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (U)  President Pervez Musharraf currently serves as both President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and Chief of Army Staff.  This dual office role is permitted under the 17th amendment to the Pakistani Constitution, which specifically allowed Musharraf to hold both offices through December 2004.   2.  (U)  In December 2004, the Pakistani parliament adopted the \"President to Hold Another Office Act.\"  This legislation specifically allowed President Musharraf to continue as President and Chief of Army Staff until the expiration of his current presidential term on November 15, 2007.  It provided an exemption to the revolving door law that bars government employees (including Musharraf as a serving Army officer) from seeking elected office for two years after leaving government service.  The Pakistani government contends that these two pieces of legislation allow Musharraf to remain concurrently President and Chief of Army Staff until the November 15 deadline.  3.  (U)  On  October 6, Pakistan's electoral college re-elected Musharraf as President.  However, the Supreme Court ruled that the Election Commission could not officially announce the results of the election until the Court ruled on two cases challenging Musharraf's eligibility to be a candidate.  Those cases, filed by two presidential challengers, claimed that Musharraf was ineligible because he was still Chief of Army Staff.  4.  (C)  On November 3, Musharraf (acting as Chief of Army Staff) imposed a State of Emergency, fired the Supreme Court justices, and suspended key civil liberties provisions of the Constitution.  He acted to prevent what he believed was an imminent Supreme Court ruling to declare him ineligible for the election he won on October 6.  5.  (C)  The government is in the process of reconstituting the Supreme Court by choosing judges willing to take an oath of allegiance to support the Provisional Constitutional Order.  A newly reconstituted Supreme Court is expected to begin hearing Musharraf's eligibility case November 13/14; the proceedings are expected to take 4-5 days.  We expect Musharraf's new hand-picked Court to rule in his favor.  6.  (U)  Under normal circumstances, President Musharraf must resign one of his offices, either President or Chief of Army Staff, no later than November 15.   However, the Provisional Constitutional Order allows him to ignore these normal constitutional provisions.  7.  (U)  Pakistani law maintains that in the event that a President's term expires prior to his successor's selection, the outgoing incumbent continues in office until such time as his successor is sworn into office.  This means that Musharraf can continue as President until the presidential election is validated and he is sworn-in for a second term.  ------------------------------- Parliamentary Election Process: -------------------------------  8.  (U)  The term of Pakistan's National Assembly expires on November 15.  The terms of the four Provincial Assemblies expire between November 15 and December 24.  The law says that elections must be scheduled within 60 days after an assembly's term expires.  If an assembly is dissolved early, elections must be held within 90 days.  9.  (U)  On November 8, Musharraf announced that parliamentary elections would be held before February 15. The Election Commission has yet to announce a specific date.  -------------------- Caretaker Government --------------------  10.  (U)  As the assemblies end, the incumbent federal and provincial governments cease to hold office.  The Pakistani Constitution, if followed, maintains that President Musharraf must immediately appoint a neutral federal caretaker government to govern until a new government is sworn in.  ISLAMABAD 00004811  002 OF 002   Under a caretaker government, the President continues to govern and the Armed Forces continue to report to the President.  At the provincial level, the President may either appoint caretaker governments or allow governors to rule directly.  Based on the election results, the new parliament will choose a new prime minister.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4793", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2007 12:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004813  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: CONVERSATIONS WITH BENAZIR BHUTTO  REF: ISLAMABAD 04793  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Ambassador spoke to Benazir Bhutto November 8 and 9 to express concerns for Bhutto's safety and to urge her to consider the possible effect her rally and arrest might have on polarization and violence in the country.  They spoke again mid-day as Bhutto was trying to leave her house but was physically blocked.  The GOP, through repeated telephone appeals from NSA Advisor Tariq Aziz, wanted the USG and (to a lesser extent the UK) to persuade   her to cancel her rally and to remain at home.  (See reftel.)  Bhutto replied that she could not abandon the party activists who had already been arrested.  Bhutto has managed to back the government into another embarrassing crackdown--and the government stupidly fell into the trap--while not exposing herself or her supporters to a dangerous public meeting.  End summary.  2. (C) Ambassador called Bhutto at 10:00 p.m., November 8, to express deep concern for Bhutto's personal safety if she proceeded with the rally.  Bhutto said that she appreciated USG concerns but she believed she had no choice but to go ahead.  She said she was concerned about the vagueness of Musharraf's promise to take off his uniform and wanted elections to take place in January.  Bhutto predicted there would be threats to her en route to the Rawalpindi rally and at the site. She mentioned two of them, an attack en route at an intersection and threats against the actual site in Rawalpindi.  Ambassador again urged her to take care of her physical security.  3. (C) Ambassador called Bhutto again November 9 at 9:30 a.m. to urge her to take into account the possible political polarization and violence that might ensue if she pursued her plans for a rally.  Ambassador said the situation seemed to be settling down and encouraged her to move in the direction of moderation.  Bhutto repeated her concern for the election timetable and Musharraf's retirement as Army chief.  She stressed the Pakistani government had arrested senior members of the Pakistan People's Party the previous night.  The government even arrested one PPP member and all his family and guests.  Bhutto stressed that if she did not support her PPP members, her leadership of the party could be called into question.  She said she would keep the Embassy informed after senior members of her party attempted to enter her house for a meeting on November 9.  4. (C) On the afternoon of November 9, Bhutto called the Ambassador to say she was attempting to leave her house. Bhutto stated government authorities were preventing her from departing but had not yet served her with an arrest arrant. Police were surrounding her house.  (Note:  In a November 8 telephone conversation, National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz urged Ambassador Patterson to intervene with Benazir Bhutto and informed the Ambassador that, while an arrest warrant had already been issued, Bhutto would not be arrested until she attempts to leave her house. See reftel. End Note.) PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4809", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/9/2007 13:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004814  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/09/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 15, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO RETURNS HOME  REF: ISLAMABAD 4809  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto retreated back into her house late November 9 after attempting to go to Rawalpindi to lead her party's demonstration.  Her Islamabad home is now surrounded by police and barricades, a virtual if not yet official house arrest.  Bhutto vowed to continue the protests. Demonstrations continued in other large cities today; many were peaceful, though PPP gatherings often resulted in clashes and/or arrests.  The home of Federal Minister for Public Affairs in Peshawar was bombed, killing four; all Consulate Peshawar personnel are accounted for and the CG does not recommend further travel restrictions..  Islamabad CG confirmed that AmCit Hashmat Dilawari was arrested November 6 at the Lahore courthouse, and has been transferred to Central Jail.  Embassy is attempting to get access to Dilawari.  Mission operations continue normally.  End summary.  Bhutto Returns Home -------------------  2. (C) Police successfully prevented Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto from traveling to Rawalpindi to attend the scheduled PPP rally.  RSO sources report that police baton-charged the crowd and arrested about 50 supporters who had gathered outside the house.  As of 1700, Bhutto had returned to her house.  A high-level PPP source with Bhutto reported that no arrest warrant had been served; therefore, the party considered today's events to be an illegal confinement.  Jersey barriers now block Bhutto's street.  3. (U) Speaking to the media on the scene, Bhutto announced that \"I have ended talks with the government.\"  She also called for protests to continue, adding \"I do not fear death, only Allah.\"  In part responding to our talking points, Bhutto claimed that her actions \"are not meant to polarize the situation\" but to lead Pakistan to true democracy.  AmCit Arrested --------------  4. (C) Islamabad CG confirmed that an AmCit, Hashmat Dilawari, was arrested November 6 at the Lahore courthouse. According to his son in the U.S., Dilawari was visiting a friend and not part of the protests there the same day.  The Deputy Director of Prisons for Punjab confirmed that Dilawari has been transferred to Central Jail Jehlum.  Embassy was informed that access would not be granted without a formal request; a diplomatic note is with the MFA.  We understand he has a heart condition.  Protests; Some Violence -----------------------  5. (C) Approximately 5,000 police continue to patrol Rawalpindi.  RSO sources report that police fired tear gas at a caravan of PPP workers trying to make their way to the PPP rally site and have fired rubber bullets into the crowd, though Post has not received information on the size of the crowd.  6. (C) CG Peshawar reported that a bomb exploded at the house of Amir Muqam, Federal Minister for Political Affairs and President of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  The attack occurred in Hayatabad, a Peshawar suburb about a 10-minute drive from the U.S. Consulate.  According to media reports, 4 were killed very near the house -- three security staff and the suicide bomber.  All Consulate personnel are accounted for and CG Peshawar does not recommend any further travel restrictions beyond those already in place.  7. (U) Several rallies in Peshawar and throughout the NWFP took place on November 9.  CG Peshawar reported a heavy police presence, and a lack of high-ranking opposition leaders at most rallies.  Tear gas was reportedly used to  ISLAMABAD 00004814  002 OF 002   disburse the gathering of 50 PPP supporters in front of Peshawar's Chamber of Commerce.  The demonstration called by the All Pakistan Democratic Movement (APDM) only drew about 100 people.  8. (U) A dozen young people burned tires in Karachi's PPP stronghold of Lyari in protest of Bhutto's house arrest, as reported in the media.  Up to 100 journalists assembled at the Karachi Press Club to observe a \"black day.\"  There were no reports of arrests or violence at either site.  9. (U) CG Lahore met November 9 with Asma Jahangir, chairperson of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan.  The CG commented to the assembled press that he reiterated the USG's commitment to elections and call on Musharraf to resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS).  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4814", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/10/2007 9:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004816  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/10/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 16, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO RELEASED; AMBASSADOR DEMARCHES ON ARREST CASES  REF: ISLAMABAD 4814  Classified By: DCM Peter Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The GOP lifted the virtual house arrest on Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto. Ambassador raised Amcit and civil society detainees cases with Interior Minister.  Lahore CG met separately with human rights activist Asma Jahangir and Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) leader Liaqat Baloch.  Restrictions on TV cable news channels continue.  Mission offices continue to operate normally, and the Embassy's Marine Ball is scheduled for tonight.  This is the only sitrep for today.  Unless events warrant a sitrep on Sunday, November 11, post will resume sitreps on Monday, November 12.  End summary.  2. (U) The government of Pakistan yesterday lifted PPP leader Benazir Bhutto's virtual house arrest. Media reports that PPP activists and police were involved in \"street clashes\" in various cities and that the government arrested an unknown number of PPP members.  3. (C) Ambassador met with Minister of Interior Sherpao and raised our concerns about Amcit Hashmat Dilwari; Sherpao promised to try and get him released. (Islamabad CG is awaiting permission for a prison visit.)  Ambassador also raised the cases of jailed Pakistani politicians and civil society leaders, including Munir Malik (former president of Supreme Court Bar Association), Ali Ahmed Kurd (senior lawyer on the defense team for the former Chief Justice), Justice Tariq Mahmud (an anti-government lawyer), five female PPP leaders, and the 17 activists charged with sedition (reftel) in Karachi.  Sherpao promised to check into the cases.  With Musharraf's announcement that elections would be held before February 15, Sherpao said that the GOP began what will be a gradual process of rolling back the state of emergency.  He did not give any timetable. Ambassador emphasized the damage that yesterday's house arrest of Benazir Bhutto and the crackdown on civil society was doing to Pakistan's image in the U.S.  Sherpao said that the National Security Council debated for two hours on whether to allow the PPP's Rawalpindi rally to go forward but decided that the risk of a suicide bombing was too great to allow it to proceed.  Lahore ------  3. (U) Lahore CG reports that targeted round-ups of political opponents continues, but that life is proceeding normally for most Pakistanis.  Police continue to tolerate student protests as long as they remain on campus.  4. (U) Local newspapers gave prominent coverage to Lahore CG's November 9 meetings with human rights activist Asma Jahangir and Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) leader Liaqat Baloch, both of whom are still under house arrest.  Baloch said the religious parties block, Mutahaida Majlis Amal (MMA), decided during its meeting to give Musharraf until November 15 to resign from his post in the Army; otherwise, the MMA plans to hold protests against Musharraf starting on November 16.  Peshawar --------  5. (U) Sporadic protests occurred across the Northwest Frontier Province yesterday.  In Peshawar, police baton-charged and tear gassed protesters. The GOP yesterday closed the main entry and exit points on the highway to stymie protests, and stop PPP activists from traveling from Peshawar to Rawalpindi.  Peshawar Consulate RSO is not expecting large protests today.  6. (U) Militants in Swat released between 45 and 60 paramilitary soldiers captured earlier in the week, according to Pakistani press.  The captured soldiers had publicly complained that they were low on rations and had not been receiving reinforcements.  Karachi -------  7. (U) PPP Sindh Provincial President, Qaim Ali Shah,  ISLAMABAD 00004816  002 OF 002   announced on November 9 that a \"black day\" protest will take place throughout Sindh on Sunday, November 11. (Note:  Sindh is Benazir Bhutto's home and power base.)  8. (U)  Although Karachi remains relatively calm today, protesters shut down the National Highway and some stores for at least two hours yesterday near Gadap Town, a PPP stronghold in Karachi.  People throughout the Sindh interior protested yesterday against the arrest of Bhutto, and dozens of activists were arrested in Mirpurkhas, Dadu, Badin, and Naushahro Feroze.  9. (U) In Quetta, approximately 40 to 50 journalists protested yesterday at the Quetta Press Club, but the gathering was disbanded peaceful when the police arrived.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/10/2007 10:29", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004817  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/10/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: RETHINKING ASSISTANCE  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  President Musharraf has now set a date for elections and indicated he will resign from the Army.  This is an opportunity to re-examine our assistance relationship and consider changes that will enable USG funding to more directly promote a more robust counter-terrorism (CT) and counter-insurgency (COIN) effort in Pakistan and provide enhanced people-to-people assistance.  We recommend directing and earmarking funds where possible, and, in some cases, refocusing the assistance.  Pakistani cooperation remains critical in maintaining the logistical lifeline to our troops in Afghanistan and in prosecuting the war on terror, but the USG needs tighter control mechanisms to regulate assistance funds to achieve desired results.  Post recommends that we:  --Continue Coalition Support Funds (CSF) but rather than depositing funds in the Pakistani treasury, disburse earmarked monies from a trust fund to provide specific anti-terrorism and counter-insurgency training and equipment for the armed forces and the Frontier Corps, as well as fund through reimbursement Pakistan security forces for expenses legitimately emanating from CT/COIN operations.  --Keep Economic Support Funds (ESF) but rather than providing a budgetary transfer to the Pakistani treasury, convert the funds to project assistance targeted principally for education that offsets the influence of madrassass and improves the quality of life for at-risk populations.  --Retain current Fulbright, IMET, USAID Development Assistance, Child Survival and Health programs, emergency relief and reconstruction aid, INL anti-narcotics programs, and the security/development assistance program for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).  END SUMMARY.  STATE OF EMERGENCY: OPPORTUNITY TO REPAIR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM  2. (C) President Musharraf has now set a date for delayed elections and indicated he will resign as Chief of Army Staff.  But his November 3 decision to replace the judiciary, suspend fundamental rights under Pakistan's constitution and arrest a wide range of civilian opposition figures represents a significant setback for Pakistan,s democratic transition.  3.  (C)  This gives us an overdue, but limited, window of opportunity to more effectively direct USG assistance to increase the control, transparency and focus of our aid toward USG counter-terrorism, counter-insurgency and democratization goals.  This will shift our relationship from a tactical one that supports the sitting Pakistani government to one based on a long-term commitment focused on directly promoting the security and well-being of the people and armed forces of Pakistan.  4. (C) At the same time, we must retain Pakistani support for maintaining the logistical lifeline for our troops in Afghanistan, our ability to prosecute jointly the War on Terror, and our long-term strategic relationship.  In such an environment, we recommend a judicious approach that reorients rather than eliminates assistance programs, changing delivery mechanisms to direct funds to specific projects and areas rather than direct budgetary transfers to the GOP.  RECOMMENDATION: PROJECTIZE BUDGET TRANSFERS  5. (C) The Pakistan government currently receives approximately $1.2 billion annually in direct budgetary transfers from the U.S. - $860 million in Coalition Support Fund (CSF) reimbursements and $200 million in Economic Support Fund (ESF) budgetary assistance.  CSF represents a commitment made to facilitate Pakistani cooperation in the War on Terror.  CSF is funded through DOD and has few effective     regulatory controls.  Post does not/not propose eliminating either program.  6. (C) At the same time, the current delivery methodology for both programs is long overdue for an adjustment.  Rather than direct budgetary transfers to the GOP, both programs should be reprogrammed to project-oriented assistance.  This budgetary support is equivalent to five percent of Pakistan,s 2006-2007 budget.  However, if these funds are projectized, the inflows will still count as foreign  ISLAMABAD 00004817  002 OF 003   assistance, rather than budgetary transfers in Pakistan,s external account.  RECOMMENDATION: CONTINUE CSF BUT NOT VIA \"BLANK CHECK\"  7. (C)  The USG currently provides approximately $1 billion annually in CSF funds to reimburse Pakistan for costs of the war on terror.  Post scrutinizes Pakistani requests for reimbursement and monitors the readiness of the Pakistani armed forces.  We estimate that currently only 50-60 percent of CSF funds actually reach the military, and less than half of that may reach that segment of the armed forces bearing the burden of the claimed expense.  For example, we provided approximately $55 million in CSF for helicopter operations from July 06 - February 07; but estimate that only $20 million went to operate the entire Pakistan Army helicopter force for all of 2007.  20 percent or less of the Army,s Cobra fleet (a critical factor in engaging militants in the tribal areas along the Afghan border) is currently operational.  8. (C)  We must maintain CSF funding to encourage continued Pakistani engagement in the war on terror.  But CSF should be directed to ensure funds are aimed at U.S.-designated needs in the fight against militant extremists.  We recommend establishment of a CSF Trust Fund, with specific amounts allocated to such areas as logistics, equipment, training, etc.  CSF money would flow into this U.S.-controlled account and dispersal would only be made with USG concurrence.  This would support a more focused and robust counter-terrorism effort in Pakistan.  9. (C)  We are fully aware of the potential legal and congressional challenges these proposals present but understand that the Congress is already considering some earmarks for CSF.  We suggest the following sample of possible earmarks to:  --Train and equip the Frontier Corps to include communications surveillance equipment, combat medical care, body armor and light weapons; --Train and equip the Army,s Special Services Group (special forces) to better conduct counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency operations; --Train and equip the Army,s helicopter forces to better conduct day/night air assaults and maintain their helicopter fleet; --Train and equip the Army to improve its tactical surveillance and SIGINT capabilities; and --Train the Air Force to develop safe and accurate close air support capabilities in support of Army operations.  RECOMMENDATION: CONVERT ESF FUNDS TO PROJECT ASSISTANCE  10. (C) President Bush committed to five years of ESF budgetary support for increased education and health expenditures.  We should end budgetary transfers to the Pakistan government.  For the two final years of this program, we should convert the annual $200 million in ESF budgetary support to project assistance and notify the GOP of this immediately.  There are insufficient conditions attached to ESF funding, and the GOP has devoted only 1.8% of its budget for education and 0.6% for health.  ESF: FOCUS ON EDUCATION  11. (C) We should divert these funds to a major expansion of our education programs to projects implemented by domestic and international civil society organizations in the public education sector.  In addition, we could launch support for private schools being run by moderate religious groups (e.g. Bareilvi) to counter expanding Deobandi/Wahhabi influence in Pakistan that is being funded by Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states.  In addition, funds could be used to support vocational training and adult literacy programs that would help improve the conditions of a significant portion of the population who are disenfranchised but currently are opposed to extremism.  ESF: IMPROVE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR AT-RISK COMMUNITIES  12. (C) Funds could also be used for agricultural development and microfinance; the agricultural sector employs some  ISLAMABAD 00004817  003 OF 003   two-thirds of the Pakistani workforce.  Easing food inflation is the single best way to garner support among non-elite Pakistanis.  Since Pakistan does not qualify for PL-480 Title II, this could be done through the McGovern-Dole International Food for Education (FFE) school lunch program. This program is conducted by private voluntary organizations using U.S. commodities.  It could also be used to provide take-home rations for families based on school attendance and food for teachers and school construction workers.  We understand that Pakistan is already considered a priority country for this program.  POSSIBLE SHIFT OF FMF TO ESF  13. (C) Embassy notes that Section 689 of the DOS Foreign Operations and Related Programs Appropriations Act governing Pakistan,s $300 million FMF allotment.  Through a certification to the Appropriations Committee finding that the Government of Pakistan is not implementing democratic reforms, the Secretary may transfer some or all of these funds to ESF and use them for basic education, health, micro-enterprise development, and democracy programs in Pakistan.  PEOPLE TO PEOPLE EXCHANGES: OUR BEST INVESTMENT  14. (C) Post does not/not recommend any suspension or changes to people-to-people exchange programs, including Fulbright and IMET.  Both are vital to establish a long-term strategic working relationship with the government and people of Pakistan.  The $31.5 Fulbright Program funds exchanges for 350 students and scholars each year. Our modest $2 million International Military Education and Training (IMET) program allows us to offer training to some 500 Pakistanis officers in the United States each year.  15. (C) The lack of outside perspective provided by IMET was particularly evident during this recent political crisis. Inter-Services Intelligence Director General Nadeem Taj, for example, lacked the global perspective that might have offset the parochial instinct to initiate extra-constitutional action.  Taj, like many of his senior compatriots, was denied IMET training during the Pressler sanctions period -- in notable contrast to Vice Chief of Army Staff Kiyani and Chief of Staff Javaid, both IMET graduates who were far more sensitive to U.S. and international concerns.  MAINTAIN CURRENT HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE  16. (C) We recommend keeping the USAID Development Assistance, Child Survival and Health programs, and emergency relief and reconstruction funds (relating to the 2005 earthquake) unchanged.  These programs already directly benefit the Pakistani people and do not directly impact on the GOP budget; they represent a long-term investment in a moderate Pakistan by demonstrating the U.S. unwavering commitment to the people of Pakistan, regardless of government actions.  17. (C) Our own interests strongly argue against any curtailment or reprogramming of funds dedicated to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement.  These programs directly support critical border security, counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics goals.  In addition, we have already ensured that the FATA support funds will be used for projects rather than provided to the Government of Pakistan as cash transfers.  ISOLATION NOT IN OUR U.S. STRATEGIC INTEREST  18. (C) Isolation of Pakistan is not in our strategic interest.  These proposed changes in our foreign assistance programming are designed to increase control, transparency and focus of funding while ensuring the war on terror moves forward and that assistance benefits those at-risk communities in Pakistan from which extremists are drawn. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4816", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/11/2007 10:16", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004818  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/11/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 17, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: MUSHARRAF TO GIVE PRESS CONFERENCE; BHUTTO HEADS FOR LAHORE  REF: ISLAMABAD 4816  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  President Musharraf was scheduled to give a press conference at 1400 local time; we will provide immediate follow-up information on his remarks for the Department.  Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto moves to Lahore today in preparation for a planned \"long march\" November 13 from Lahore to Islamabad.  Police are blocking PPP faithful from welcoming her at the Lahore Airport. In a reception for the diplomatic corps November 10, she reiterated demands that Musharraf announce a firm date for elections and his resignation from the Army.  In response to an unfavorable editorial, the GOP decided to expel three Daily Telegraph reports; two have left the country and a third is expected to depart today.  Sky and Fox news are back on the air, reportedly because they have not been critical of Musharraf;  BBC, CNN and most local TV news cable channels remain blocked.  Arrests of political opposition leaders continue although there are reports that hundreds of lawyers have been released on bail.  Media reports the Pakistan-Iran pipeline deal has been finalized and will be signed within a month.  Mission operations continue normally.  End summary.  2. (U) The GOP amended November 10 the Army Act of 1952. Under the amended act, the Army will be able to try civilians on charges such as treason, sedition, attacking army personnel, \"assaulting the president,\" and \"giving statements conducive to public mischief.\"  Under the Provisional Constitutional Order, the amendment is applicable immediately, without legislative approval.  The GOP originally planned this amendment in response to former Chief Justice Chaudhry's decisions to release \"disappeared\" citizens, who have been held without charge.  In the process, the Court had released several known or suspected terrorists.  The amendment was considered a way to bring terrorists detained without charge to trial in military courts, which have less stringent evidentiary rules.  3. (U) In an open letter to People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto, former prime minister Nawaz Sharif stated that his Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) party would be willing to participate in an all party opposition conference.  Bhutto has yet to respond publicly, but she reached out this week to the religious parties.  4. (U) Bhutto travels today to Lahore today in preparation for her announced \"long march\" from Lahore to Islamabad on November 13.  The government is sure to block the march. Speaking to the diplomatic corps late November 10, Bhutto reiterated her demands on Musharraf to hold elections on time and to resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS).  Police are blocking PPP supporters from entering the Lahore Airport to welcome her.  5. (C) Musharraf convoked November 10 his corps commanders, the first such reported meeting since the imposition of emergency.  Repeating his lines from the November 5 briefing to ambassadors and November 7 meeting with National Assembly members, Musharraf reportedly argued that his actions were justified because \"the judiciary had given unnecessary relief to terrorists and anti-social elements.\"  Musharraf committed to elections \"as soon as possible.\"  6.  (U) Local newspapers are reporting that 350 Lahore lawyers have been released on bail; however, police continue to arrest opposition party members.  Also, it appears that the GOP has started to transfer lawyers, opposition party leaders and human rights activists from one jail to others, making it more difficult for Embassy (not to mention famiily members) to track these key contacts.  7.  (U) The GOP reportedly has forcibly moved (former) Supreme Court Justice Javed Iqbal, who was the presiding justice hearing the case against Musharraf's re-election, from Islamabad to his home in Quetta.  When Attorney General Malik Qayyum informed the Ambassador November 7 that justices would no longer be under house arrest, he added that the GOP expected them to leave the capital for their hometowns.  ISLAMABAD 00004818  002 OF 002    8.  (C) Sky and Fox news are being allowed to broadcast, reportedly because they have not been critical of Musharraf; BBC CNN and the largest of Pakistan's local TV news channels continue to be blocked.  According to the ARY TV Chief, his station, along with Geo, Aaj and Dawn, will refuse to sign up to the government's new media code of conduct.  9.  (C) In retaliation for an unfavorable editorial written in London, three journalists from the UK's Telegraph newspaper were ordered out of Pakistan.  One journalist has already left; the other two, including the Telegraph's long-time bureau chief Islamabad Wilkinson, are scheduled to depart November 11.  The editorial, said Musharraf \"may be a son of a bitch, but he is our son of a bitch.\" The Information Ministry gave the official reason for the expulsion: \"They were using foul and abusive language against Pakistan and Pakistan's leadership.\"  Other western journalists with whom our spokesperson met fear this is the beginning of a larger crackdown by the GOP; they asked for continued public support from western governments.  10.  (U) Sunday editorials in local newspapers highlight negative business climate created and inflation pressure caused by the imposition of emergency.  11.  (U)  The media reports that Pakistan and Iran have finalized the proposed $7.4 billion pipeline deal; sources said the remaining technical details will be resolved within a month. (Post has reported extensively on our efforts to dissuade the GOP from completing this deal.)  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4728|07ISLAMABAD4818", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/12/2007 10:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004819  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF'S PRESS CONFERENCE  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4728      B. ISLAMABAD 4818  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Meeting with local and international press November 11, President Musharraf announced elections would be held \"by January 9\" and said he would take the presidential oath of office as a civilian after the Supreme Court allows the Election Commission to confirm his re-election.  He declined to set a date for lifting the state of emergency, but indicated it would continue through the elections.  This prompted a skeptical response from international media.  End summary.  2. (C) A clearly defensive President Musharraf on November 11 addressed the local and international press corps.  He immediately announced: (1) Pakistan's National Assembly will complete for the first time in Pakistan's history its full five year term on November 15; (2) the Provincial Assemblies will be dissolved on November 20; and (3) this would allow parliamentary elections before January 9, 2008.  Musharraf said that the election should come before the Islamic holiday of Moharram, but that he would leave the setting of the election day to Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP).  3. (U) Musharraf also announced that he would take the presidential oath of office \"as a civilian\" as soon as the Supreme Court allows the ECP to confirm the results of his October 6 re-election.  In response to a Fox News question on how long the state of emergency will last, Musharraf said he \"could not give a date.\"  He indicated that elections would be held under the state of emergency.  4. (C) Repeating much of what he said to the diplomatic corps on November 5 (Ref A), Musharraf presented his case against (former) Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry.  He said the Court \"demoralized law enforcement and encouraged terrorists,\" and argued that the country had moved into a state of paralysis that necessitated imposing a state of emergency.  He admitted that it was \"a drastic measure,\" but one required \"to save democracy.\"  He confirmed that the (former) Chief Justice and his court would not be reinstated.  5. (U) Turning to media freedom, Musharraf proclaimed: \"I gave independence to the media.\"  He claimed that new restrictions on content were based on other countries' codes of conduct for the press and that only a few channels remained off.  He would not allow \"defamation by design.\" Responding to a question about the three Telegraph reporters expelled November 11, he said the newspaper's editorial had used \"unacceptable words.\"  6. (U) In responding to questions, he repeatedly committed to elections, but was equally adamant that those politicians and activists who disturbed law and order would be, or would continue to be, detained.  He welcomed international observers on election day.  Musharraf deliberately gave no positive signal that he would reach any political understanding with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto before the elections.  He noted that the parties would all compete in fair elections and that the election results would determine the make up of the future government.  He stressed that it was not about personality but about political parties and how well they do.  He observed that an election result in favor of Bhutto's party is by no means a foregone conclusion.  7. (U) Musharraf repeatedly linked the spread of terrorism to the need for imposing a state of emergency.  He said he did not believe foreign aid to combat terrorism would be cut off because \"unnamed\" countries' leaders, with whom he had spoken, \"understand this problem\" in Pakistan.  Musharraf believed that the emergency powers would help, not hinder, the war on terror.  Furthermore, the November 10 amendment to the Army Act was to allow military courts to hear cases against those \"missing,\" who were arrested under Pakistan's anti-terrorism laws.  He denied that the amendment would allow any civilian to be charged in a military court.  8. (U) Musharraf ended the press conference responding to a  ISLAMABAD 00004819  002 OF 002   local reporter's prompting for a stronger reaction to \"western interference.\"  Musharraf answered: \"We do not need anyone's dictation or advice.  We in Pakistan operate as per our own will.\"  Emergency was imposed, Musharraf insisted, despite the expectation of western disapproval.  9 (C) Comment: Musharraf's rather unnerving performance did not display his usual poised, confident demeanor.  He was flanked by key cabinet and political advisors, most of whom appeared uncomfortable and embarrassed by Musharraf's harangue against the (former) Chief Justice.  His delivery was forced and marked by emotion.  It was a far cry from the self-confident, calm and even humorous head of state who a year ago successfully appeared on \"The Daily Show.\"  While the news on an elections date is positive, it is almost impossible to envision how elections can be held under a state of emergency which suspends all political rights.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2007 6:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004821  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 18, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: REACTIONS TO MUSHARRAF'S PRESS CONFERENCE; MORE ARRESTS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Some opposition parties threatened to boycott elections if they are held under a state of emergency.  All media covered the Secretary's Sunday talk shows comments on Pakistan.  The Attorney General predicted the Supreme Court would begin hearing the case on Musharraf's re-election on November 13 and hoped they would file a verdict by the weekend.  Protests continue throughout the country, with several hundred mostly Pakistan People's Party (PPP) members arrested in Karachi and Peshawar.  Bhutto and the PPP continue with plans for the \"long march,\" scheduled for November 13 from Lahore to Islamabad.  The government in Karachi seized a transmitter for a popular FM radio station. Human rights advocate Jahangir spoke out against the proposed amendment to the Army Act.  Mission offices continue to operate normally.  End summary.   Various Official Reactions to Election Announcement/Army Act Modification ----------------  2. (U) Speaking to the press, Benazir Bhutto said Musharraf's announcement that elections would be held before January 9 was positive, but it alone will not defuse the current political crisis in Pakistan.  Citing the lack of a timetable on when the emergency will end and the Army Act amendment, Bhutto said it will be very difficult to hold transparent elections.  Bhutto avoided answering questions pertaining to any possible boycott by the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) of the upcoming elections, but she did urge all parts of society to participate in her anticipated \"long march\" from Lahore to Islamabad, scheduled for November 13.  3.  (C)  Because of the current state of emergency, three political parties, including the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N), Jamaat-i Islami (JI) and the Pakistan Tehrik-i Insaaf (PTI), announced on November 9 in a press release their plans to boycott the elections.  In a separate statement, the religious block of parties, Muttahida Majlis-i Amal (MMA), said elections could not take place under the emergency and demanded the immediate restoration of the constitution.  4. (U)  Former Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry rejected the allegations made against him by President Musharraf in his November 10 press conference.  Chaudhry questioned the existence of any evidence against him and charged Musharraf with not wanting an independent judiciary.  5. (U) Asma Jahangir, the Chairperson of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, condemned the change to the Army Act, which now allows for civilians to be tried in military tribunals.  Still detained, Asma said that this change now allowed for civilians to face unusually severe penalties for crimes ranging from libel to murder and said the amendment further demonstrated the GOP's lack of faith in the judiciary.  The GOP claims the amendment will only be used to address the problem of the courts releasing suspected terrorists who were detained without charge.   6. (C) The Attorney General told the press November 10 that Musharraf's election eligibility case that was scheduled to be heard by the Supreme Court today will not be heard until November 14 because the bench does not have the necessary 11 justices at this time.  However, the Court will hear the initial opening of a challenge of the state of emergency, filed by Tikka Iqbal Khan, the former Food Minister in Punjab, with an eight-justice bench.  Consulate Reports -----------------  7. (U) Several PPP demonstrations took place on November 11, including a \"black day\" in Sindh that resulted in approximately 300 arrests; a PPP-led attempt to block the national highway in Hyderbad; a demonstration in Dadu over the Bhutto detention that resulted in 100 arrested and 4 wounded; and several others in Larkana, Nawabshah, Mithi, Thatta, Khairpur, Shikarpur, and Nauhsarhro Feroze where many arrests were made and tires were burned.  Several people were  ISLAMABAD 00004821  002 OF 002   reportedly injured when police used batons and tear gast to prevent a rally at the Karachi Press Club.  8. (U) Consulate received reports that the government had forcibly removed the broadcast transmitted for the Mast FM 103 Radio Network.  To date, the very-popular station has not received any official notice as to why this action took place, but the station does have a contract with BBC Urdu Services, through which FM 103 runs BBC news bulletins.  (At this time, BBC is still off the televised air due to the GOP belief that it is broadcasting anti-government messages and has not agreed to the new media Code of Conduct.)  9. (U) Peshawar: A bomb explosion at an internet cafe in Peshawar's old city left one injured as militants continued to drive their activities they deem to be \"un-Islamic.\"  10. (U) On November 11, Small demonstrations were reported in Khyber, Bajaur, and Bannu, and Shah Farman, the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) leader of PTI, was reportedly placed under house arrest following a small demonstration.  11. (U) Today, Peshawar lawyers plan to protest before the High Court, PML-Q activists plan to gather at the Peshawar Press Club to protest the suicide bombing on November 9 which killed former NWFP provincial minister Pir Muhammad Khan, and JI announced that they would be holding a rally in Peshawar on November 13.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4818", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2007 11:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004824  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 19, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO UNDER HOUSE ARREST AGAIN  REF: ISLAMABAD 4818  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The GOP placed PPP leader Bhutto under house arrest and deployed several thousand police in Lahore, who are now (1330 local) clashing with PPP activists staging a \"Long March\" from Lahore to Islamabad.  As Interior Minister promised Ambassador, the GOP last night released Amcit Hashmat Dilawari from prison. The reconstituted Supreme Court yesterday heard two cases challenging the state of emergency.  The Army stepped up operations in Swat. Mission offices continue to operate normally. End summary.  2. (C) The GOP overnight placed Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto under house arrest for one week in Lahore and continued arrests of PPP supporters in the area. Consulate Lahore reports that the police are using tear gas and baton charges to break up the start of the PPP's planned \"Long March\" from Lahore to Islamabad.  The demonstration is being led in Bhutto's absence by local PPP leader Shah Mahmood.  Several thousand police are deployed around Lahore to stop the march.  3. (C) Lahore CG met with Bhutto last night (septel) where she claimed the political situation would force her to end negotiations with Musharraf.  We do not yet have a local reaction to Bhutto's CNN interview because cable access to CNN remains blocked.  4. (C) As Interior Secretary Sherpao promised Ambassador, the Government of Pakistan last night released AmCit Hashmat Dilawari from prison. In a conversation with the Embassy, his family stated he is in good condition.  5. (U) A nine-member reconstituted Supreme Court yesterday heard two cases challenging the state of emergency. The Court will resume hearing the cases on Wednesday, according to press. Two more judges were sworn in to the Supreme Court today, bringing the total number of Supreme Court judges to 11, according to press.  This paves the way for the Court to begin hearing the pending case on Musharraf's re-election as President.  6. (C) A loose group of civil society organizations, media, NGOs, labor unions, and citizens are planning a protest November 14 in Islamabad, according to mission contacts.  7. (U) The Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group yesterday \"condemned the abrogation of the Constitution of Pakistan\" and gave Pakistan ten days to restore its constitution and lift the state of emergency or face suspension from the Commonwealth.  8. (U) The press reported increased Army deployments and anti-militant operations in Swat.  Musharraf indicated November 12 that the GOP would step up actions against extremists in the area.  9. (U) Peshawar CG reports that NWFP was relatively quiet yesterday, with isolated and peaceful protests.  Several of the smaller religious and nationalist parties, lawyers, and several NGOs are planning separate protests today in Peshawar.  The Pakistan Muslim-League Nawaz is planning a protest there on Thursday.  10. (U) Some international TV news channels, including SkyNews and Fox, are back on the air, but BBC, CNN, and most local news outlets remain blocked.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4354", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2007 14:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004830  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: NEXT POLITICAL STEPS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4354  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat told Ambassador November 13 that the Elections Commission would announce a date certain for elections on November 18 or 19, probably before Musharraf resigned as Chief of Army Staff \"some time next week.\"  The state of emergency and the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) would remain in effect through the elections and formation of the new government.  All those currently detained/arrested would be freed and allowed to campaign, if they abide by an electoral code of conduct.  The next National Assembly would be asked to retroactively approve the PCO. (Note: this will give Musharraf immunity from possible charges of treason for abrogating the constitution.)  Using the PCO, Musharraf would ensure that the new COAS (General Kayani) would not have the power to lift the state of emergency; this power would be transferred to the President.  The GOP remains particularly concerned with Bhutto's safety and recommends she leave the Punjab and return to Karachi.  The lack of security will delay or prevent elections in some districts of the Northwest Frontier Province.  The leading candidate to be Caretaker Prime Minister is current Chairman of the Senate Mohammed Mian Soomro.  End Summary.  2.  (C) Ambassador and Polcouns met November 13 with Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain.  She said the USG was pleased that President Musharraf had agreed to an election date and indicated he would resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS) but voiced strong USG concern that the state of emergency be lifted quickly.  Quoting the Secretary, Ambassador questioned how free and fair elections could take place under a state of emergency with limits on freedom of speech and assembly, opposition leaders in jail, and private news channels blocked.  3.  (C)  Shujaat calmly replied that the 2002 elections were held under the Legal Framework Order imposed by Musharraf after he took power in 1999.  The current Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) was no different.   The political parties campaigned and participated in elections then, and Shujaat expected they would do so again, despite some threats to boycott.  4.  (C)  By the time the election timetable is announced next week, all those currently detained/arrested will be released in time to campaign for elections, asserted Shujaat.  Some have been released already.  The GOP remained very concerned about Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto's security, so Shujaat could not rule out continuing restrictions on her ability to attend large demonstrations. Bhutto's letter accusing Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi of orchestrating the suicide bombing that killed over 140 PPP workers during her October 18 welcome home rally in Karachi, Shujaat warned, had made enemies.  The GOP had already shared additional threats with Bhutto, and was recommending she leave the Punjab and return to Karachi.  This, he said, was only for Bhutto's protection.  Shujaat added that the state of emergency would benefit all parties by improving the law and order situation.  5.  (C)  Given current security problems in the Northwest Frontier Province, Shujaat said that he did not think there could be elections in those districts being controlled by Taliban forces.  This would also eliminate the possibility that smaller nationalist/religious parties which dominate this area might control the outcome of an election where the PML and PPP win virtually equal percentages of the national vote.  He predicted PML would win 110-120 of 148 seats in the Punjab (not counting the reserved seats for women).  5.  (C)  He predicted that the Elections Commission would announce the date of elections on November 18 or 19. Ambassador again asked how parties could campaign under current restrictions, and Shujaat insisted that the Election Commission would establish a code of conduct that would govern campaigning.  PML had provided its suggestions on the proposed code of conduct, as had the PPP.  He intimated that approval to hold rallies would be dependent on parties signing up to the electoral code of conduct.  (Note: the GOP has said that private TV new channels would also be able to  ISLAMABAD 00004830  002 OF 003   operate, if they signed up to the new media code of conduct.)  6.  (C)  Shujaat confirmed that President Musharraf would resign as COAS after the Supreme Court rules on his re-election.  That should happen next week, but the election date likely would be announced first.  7.  (C)  Ambassador noted that Musharraf signed the state of emergency as COAS, not as President, and asked what would happen after Musharraf resigned from the Army.  Shujaat confirmed that currently General Kayani (slated to move up from Vice Chief to Chief when Musharraf resigns) would have the power to lift the state of emergency.  However, Musharraf plans to use the PCO to transfer the power to declare a state of emergency from the COAS to the President.  Kayani will have the sole authority to order Army forces into Swat, for example, but \"we should ensure that the COAS is kept out of politics.\"  8.  (C)  Shujaat said the plan was to keep the PCO in force, i.e., keep the constitution suspended, until the next National Assembly votes on the PCO.  A two-thirds majority is required to retroactively approve the extra-constitutional measures that Musharraf has taken. (Note:  Otherwise, Musharraf could be accused of treason in abrogating the constitution.)  Caretaker Cabinet -----------------  9.  (C)  Shujaat said the National Caretaker Cabinet would be announced after the National Assembly completed its term, probably on November 15 or 16.  He said the leading contender to be Caretaker Prime Minister was Mohammed Mian Soomro, currently Chairman of the Senate (see bio below).  Musharraf previously had agreed to vet his candidate for Caretaker Prime Minister with Bhutto; it is unclear if she has approved this choice. Caretaker governments for the provinces will be announced after they complete their terms, i.e., after November 20.  (Note: Under Pakistan's constitution, when parliamentary elections are announced the President appoints a caretaker government that rules until elections are completed and a new government is sworn in.  The President and the Armed Forces are not affected by this change. See reftel.)  10.  (C)  On Bhutto, Shujaat repeated his position that she could get the approval she seeks to lift the constitutional two-term limit on prime ministers \"after the elections.\"   He added \"we will accept the election results and should create a moral tradition on this subject.  What do we get from dirty politics?\"  He saw no point to Bhutto's demand to reconstitute the Election Commission but said the PML was ready to suspend the approval of contracts by nizams (mayors) for the electoral period as the PPP had suggested.  11.  (C)  Comment:  As always, Shujaat is working to control the odds in favor of Musharraf and the PML, and he appeared confident of outmaneuvering Bhutto.  We are concerned about the plan to continue the state of emergency and the suspension of the constitution through elections and the formation of a new government.  The decision to transfer authority to impose a state of emergency from the COAS to the President indicates Musharraf remains wary about the reactions of the Army, specifically General Kayani, to this plan.  (Should conditions warrant it, the Army would take whatever action it feels is necessary regardless of legal niceties.)  It is also clear that Musharraf and Shujaat want Bhutto out of their territory in the Punjab, and they will use the (very real) security threats to enforce this point. Protestations notwithstanding, Shujaat is fully prepared to engage in dirty politics to retain power in the upcoming elections. End Comment.  12.  (C)  Background on Soomro:  The current Chairman of the Senate is Muhammad Mian Soomro; his term expires in 2007.  He is a self-effacing member of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party and acted as the covering candidate for Pervez Musharraf's re-election bid in October of 2007.  Soomro represents an established Sindh feudal family; Musharraf appointed him as Governor of Sindh, where he served from May 25, 2000-December 26, 2002.  He was elected as a Senator on February 23, 2003 and subsequently was elected as Chairman of  ISLAMABAD 00004830  003 OF 003   the Senate on March 12, 2003.  Previously, he was an international banker who worked for Bank of America, International Bank of Yemen, Faysal Islamic Bank of Bahrain, Muslim Commercial Bank, Agriculture Development Bank of Pakistan, Federal Bank of Cooperatives and the National Bank of Pakistan.  He was born on August 19, 1960 and has degrees from Forman Christian College (BS), Punjab University (MS in physics) and Northrop University (operations management). PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/13/2007 15:17", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004831  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EXPECTS TO MEET AMBITIOUS TAX COLLECTION TARGET  Summary  1.  (SBU)  The Federal Board of Revenue expects to meet its annual tax collection target of Rs.1.025 trillion ($16.8 billion ). The first quarter tax (July - September 2007) collection is up by 21.1 percent, compared to the same period of last year, but falls short of the FBR's self-imposed target of Rs.218 billion ($3.57 billion) .  The FBR attributes this shortfall to transition to new electronic tax filing system, and hopes to recoup the lost revenue in the coming months.  FBR maintains that there has been no increase in tax avoidance and non-compliance, but admitted it is facing resistance from the services sector to any increased taxes.  The FBR has contacted with Georgia University to research methods to tax under-taxed sectors, in particular the services sector.  End summary.  FBR Confident It Will Meet Its Annual Tax Target  2.  (SBU)  Econ Officers met Dr. Ather Maqsood, Chief of Research Service of the Federal Board of Revenue (FBR), October 30 to discuss reports that the FBR will not be able to meet its annual tax target of Rs.1.025 trillion ($16.8 billion), due to an increase in non-compliance and a drop in the number of tax filers.  Maqsood refuted these reports, asserting that the FBR will be able to meet its annual tax collection target, provided the economy continues to grow at the same pace and there is political stability. (Note:  We met with Maqsood three days before the imposition of the state of emergency.  End note.)  The government has projected 7 percent GDP growth and a 6.5 percent inflation rate.  He explained that, after graduation from the IMF program, Pakistan is no longer held to binding quarterly tax collection targets. The FBR itself sets monthly and quarterly targets, which may be adjusted.  Transition to Modern System Causes Shortfall in the First Quarter Tax Collection  4.  (SBU)  The Federal Board of Revenue is modernizing its collection systems, and moving to an electronic filing and collection system.  Maqsood attributed the shortfall in first quarter tax collections to the transition and initial operational problems with the new computerized system.  He was confident that this loss will be recovered in the coming quarters.  The FBR collected Rs. 257.85 billion ($4.23 billion) in taxes from July-October 27, compared to Rs.212.92 billion ($3.49 billion) in the same period last year, an increase of 21.1 percent.  Tax evasion did not increase, but low GDP-tax ratio persists  5.  (SBU) Contrary to press reports, there was no increase in tax evasion, and Maqsood emphasized that the number of individuals filling income tax actually increased by 11.1 percent, from 1.8 million to 2.0 million in the last year.  He said the low number of individuals filing income tax is also due to the fact that some income tax payers are not required to file returns, and are not counted in the statistics for individuals filing income tax.  6.  (SBU)  Maqsood, however, acknowledged that the tax to GDP ratio is very low and some sectors are under-taxed.  He cited the example of the services sector which comprises 50 percent of GDP, but its tax contribution is only 30 percent of GDP.  The financial sector only began paying federal excise tax on cash withdrawals and letter of credit transactions from last year.  Maqsood said that the FBR is facing opposition from the services sector on imposition of new taxes.  Lawyers and doctors do not pay taxes on services rendered. Whenever the government tried to levy taxes on their services, they have resisted it.  Only the telecoms and the banking sectors are adequately taxed. There is a 15 percent sales tax on cell phone bills, which Maqsood described as a good revenue generator for government, given the tremendous increase in the use of cell phones.   Studies Underway to Broaden Base and Increase Tax Collection  7.  (U)  The Federal Board of Revenue has contracted with Georgia State University for a project on tax policy reforms. The project will examine the gap between each sector's tax contribution and what should it pay. The project is likely to benefit Pakistan in improving tax compliance and in generating revenue from the under-taxed sectors, particularly the service sector.  Comment  8.  (SBU)  Comment:  While the Federal Bureau of Revenue has made  ISLAMABAD 00004831  002 OF 002   significant progress over the past few years in generating additional tax revenue because of tax policy and administrative reforms, it must now focus seriously on broadening the tax base. Pakistan is now a services-based economy, so taxation of this growing sector is essential to close the government's fiscal deficit.  We will be tracking the FBR's revenue collection in the coming months to see how the state of emergency and political uncertainty affects Pakistan's economy.  End comment. " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2007 1:47", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004832  SIPDIS  SIPDIS, SENSITIVE  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PHUM, PK SUBJECT:  PAKISTAN ELECTIONS OBSERVERS  1.  (U)  This is an action request, please see para 3.  2.  (SBU)  Summary.  President Musharraf announced November 11 that Pakistan's parliamentary elections will be held by January 9.   With imposition of a state of emergency, post believes it is more important than ever to increase the number of election observers and is requesting that DRL provide the International Republican Institute (IRI) with the funds required to add another ten long-term and six short-term observers to its Pakistan mission.  Post has requested IRI field another public reaction poll as soon as possible.  Ambassador November 10 demarched the Minister of Interior on behalf of IRI, The Asia Foundation and several arrested Pakistani human rights lawyers. End Summary.  3.  (SBU)  President Musharraf announced November 11 that Pakistan's parliamentary elections would be held by January 9.  Post will continue to work to persuade the GOP to lift the state of emergency, restore access for all media, and release detained political opposition leaders so that free and fair elections can proceed in January.  3.  (SBU)  Post believes that, given current events, it will be more important than ever to have the maximum number of independent election observers.  Action request: We request that DRL provide IRI with the additional funds required to increase the number of long-term observers from 12 to 22 and short-term observers from 40 to 50 (three of which should be able to be funded out of DRL's current grant because IRI will not be conducting an exit poll as originally planned).  IRI would send the additional observers to cover key districts in the Punjab heartland where we believe the highest instance of possible fraud will occur.  IRI/Pakistan believes this is the correct mix of long-term and short-term to ensure that the overall observer mission is informed and effective, particularly to cover these key constituencies.  IRI/Pakistan estimates an additional US $450,000 will be needed to fund this addition.  4.  (SBU)   Post has also requested that IRI field another poll as soon as possible to take the public temperature on reactions to the State of Emergency and how it is affecting support for political leaders.  IRI/Pakistan advises us they plan to start the poll next week.  5.  (SBU)  Ambassador met November 10 with Interior Minister Sherpao.  She raised USG concern about the arrest and treatment of several Pakistani civil society leaders, including attorneys Aitzaz Ahsan and Munir Malik, as Members of Congress have expressed concern about their welfare.  Ambassador also asked Sherpao to intervene to ensure that  IRI, which had received a letter from the Economic Affairs Division advising them to leave the country, would be allowed to stay and oversee our elections observation mission. Ambassador also asked Sherpao to intervene in favor of The Asia Foundation local director Jon Summers, who has been advised his visa had been cancelled.  Sherpao said he had no information about IRI or TAF but would look into the cases and get back to us.   He assured the Ambassador that Ahsan, Malik and others were being treated properly, were receiving required medications and could receive visits from relatives.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07THEHAGUE1909", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2007 3:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004833  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y - - ADDED THE HAGUE AS ADDRESSEE  SIPDIS  THE HAGUE PLEASE PASS TO CWC DEL  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2017 TAGS: PARM, PK, PREL, CWC SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON PAKISTANI CANDIDATE FOR CRITICAL OPCW CHAIRMANSHIP  REF: A. THE HAGUE 1909       B. STATE 148567      C. ISLAMABAD 4622      D. THE HAGUE 1962  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission, Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) , (d)  1. (C) On November 13, Haider Shah, Director of the United Nations desk at the Pakistan MFA, called Polcouns to respond to reftel demarches.  Shah said that after careful review of the pros and cons, Pakistan had decided to decline the Chairmanship for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).  Because Pakistan is currently a member of the OPCW Executive Committee and the Chairman of the Asia Group, the MFA decided that it could not further commit itself at this time.  Polcouns expressed disappointment in the decision, saying that Pakistan was missing an opportunity to enhance its counter-proliferation image but would convey GOP regrets to The Hague. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4824", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/14/2007 10:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004837  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PREL, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 20, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO REACHES OUT TO OPPOSITION LEADERS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4824  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The Pakistan People's Party \"long march\" continued November 14, but with much reduced numbers, resulting from hundreds of arrests.  Bhutto remains under house arrest in Lahore but is busy contacting opposition party colleagues.  Additional religious and nationalist party leaders have been arrested and transferred to prisons. Post's request for access to lawyers' movement leader Aitzaz Ahsan was verbally denied November 13, but Ahsan's daughter reports that he is physically fine.  The GOP has moved to control the sale of satellite dishes; it also took Sky News and Fox back off the air.  Mission operations continued normally.  End summary.  2. (C) The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) \"long march\" continued November 14 from Lahore en route to Islamabad. According to Post contacts, yesterday's crowd out of Lahore was estimated only at 350 people; today's crowd has further shrunk to 200.  3. (U) PPP leader Benazir Bhutto remained in Lahore under house arrest; CG Lahore reports several thousand police occupy the neighborhood.  She denied any hope of reconciliation with President Musharraf until the state of emergency is lifted.  She reportedly spoke by phone late November 13 with the other former prime minister Nawaz Sharif.  Bhutto has also spoken to Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) leader Qazi Hussain Ahmad and Awami National Party (ANP) president Asfandyar Wali Khan.  These parties have reportedly agreed to cooperate against the state of emergency, but they have not decided on specific events or dates.  4. (U) Despite Bhutto's presence, Lahore remains calm. Student action against the state of emergency at Lahore University of Management Sciences and at Punjab University has occurred without incident.  However, the GOP continued late November 13 to arrest hundreds from the PPP leadership, particularly in Lahore and throughout Punjab province.  5. (U) PPP continues to stage small rallies throughout Karachi in protest of Bhutto's house arrest.  Police baton charged a November 13 rally at the Karachi Press Club by the PPP Women's Wing.  Police also baton charged PPP protesters in Larkhana, the Bhutto ancestral home, which resulted in arrests.  6. (U) JI number two Liaqat Baloch was arrested late November 13; previously, he had only been detained under house arrest.  Baloch was transported to Adiala Prison in Rawalpindi.  The detention order is for 30 days.  7. (U) The November 13 ANP protest in Peshawar was baton charged and tear gassed by police.  Frontier Province ANP leader Afrasiab Khattack was arrested along with a dozen other ANP workers.  An indefinite curfew has been issued for Swat and Malakand.  Another ANP rally in Karachi ended in arrests, including ANP Sindh Secretary General Amin Khatak.  8. (U) Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf leader Imran Khan is reportedly back under arrest.  9. (C) Post sent November 13 a diplomatic note to MFA requesting access to Aitzaz Ahsan and Munir Malik, the current and former Supreme Court Bar Association presidents, respectively.  The Interior Ministry unofficially informed Post late November 13 that no such access would be granted because relatives had been allowed to visit them.  Bushra Aitzaz, Ahsan's wife, confirmed that their daughter had been able to visit once in the last couple of days in order to deliver medicines.  He appeared to be physically fine. Bushra Aitzaz plans to be back in the capital o/a November 16 to try to see her husband for the first time since his November 3 arrest.  10. (C) Pakistan's reconstituted Supreme Court grew to 11 justices November 13.  However, the Court has not yet set a new date to rehear the petitions against Musharraf's October  ISLAMABAD 00004837  002 OF 002   6 re-election.  11. (U) CNN, BBC, and now Sky News and Fox, as well as the largest local cable news channels remain off the air.  The Commerce Ministry issued November 12 a ban on the import of all equipment used for reception, broadcast and distribution of satellite signals.  Importers will now need to obtain permission from the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) to bring in dishes and related equipment. This measure is in response to increased sales of dishes -- an attempt by Pakistanis to access local, independent news channels, which the GOP has ordered cable operators to block since November 3.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4824", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/15/2007 12:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004864  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PINR, AEMR, KFLO, CASC SUBJECT: \"LIKE MINDED\" GROUP: REACTIONS TO ELECTIONS UNDER A STATE OF EMERGENCY  REF: ISLAMABAD 4824  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C/NF) Summary: International donors for Pakistan's pro-democracy programs are growing increasingly skeptical that the government can reverse actions related to the state of emergency in time to stave off aid cuts or decisions to cancel election observation missions.  Post continues to caution that such action is premature.  End summary.  2. (C/NF) PolOff attended November 13 the weekly meeting of the \"like minded\" group on democracy/election issues, which includes diplomatic representatives from the EU and/or Commonwealth countries, plus the U.S. and (sometimes) Japan.   The European Commission  3. (C/NF) The European Commission's DCM Balthasar Benz announced that the European Commissioner would decide in Brussels later November 13 whether to send an EC observer mission for Pakistan's parliamentary elections.  President Musharraf announced November 11 that these elections should occur before January 9, 2008.  The Commissioner's position, reported Benz, would likely be: \"No observers if elections are under a state of emergency.\"  EC/Islamabad advised the Commissioner to make the decision public.  Benz confirmed that if, between now and elections, the emergency is lifted, \"we are ready to go.\"  UK/Commonwealth  4. (C/NF) The UK High Commission's PolCouns Thomas Drew briefed the recently released Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group (CMAG) statement that gave Pakistan ten days to reverse anti-democratic actions.  He said it was a middle ground between doing nothing and suspending Pakistan's membership in the organization.  For now, the suspension threat is just a \"useful lever,\" Drew added.  The organization has this next week to determine whether to use it or not, before heads of government meet in Kigali.  Separately, Drew told Polcouns that Prime Minister Aziz had lobbied hard with Commonwealth SecGen McKinnon to convince him not to go forward with a suspension.  According to Drew, at the CMAG meeting, the Canadians and Australians had pushed the hardest for a suspension, with the UK acting as a moderating force.  \"A Text With No Status\"  5. (C/NF) International NGO representatives and officials from some of the donor countries reportedly attended a UN Development Programme (UNDP)-called, elections technical working group meeting on November 12.  Confounded by the difficulties of assisting with and observing elections under a state of emergency, this technical-level group drafted \"a text with no status,\" intended for donors to consider.  6. (C/NF) The text proposes that donors would separately argue the same points to the GOP: (1) re-instate media freedoms, (2) ensure judicial independence, (3) release lawyers, human rights activists and political party workers, and (4) treat political parties/leaders equally, allowing them to conduct campaign programs.  The text does not set any deadline for the GOP to complete these four points.  However, Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) estimates that it needs at least 45 days, logistically, to put on these elections. Counting back from Musharraf's announced deadline for elections of January 9, 2008, these four points would need to be fulfilled by November 20, so argued Netherlands' PolOff Mirjam Krijnen.  7. (C/NF) If donors were to cut-off the aid provided for  ISLAMABAD 00004864  002 OF 002   elections through the UNDP, it would mainly affect training of poll workers.  Much of the hardware (e.g., ballot boxes), reported Krijnen, has already been delivered.  She also mentioned that, because of government arrests and intimidation, UNDP programs with the political parties and journalists have ground to a halt.  Japan  8. (C/NF) Lastly, Japan's PolOff Katsunori Ashida quoted recent statements by his Foreign Minister: While there is no final decision as yet, \"Japan may have to reel in\" its aid. Reportedly, the FM further noted that a planned increase in Japan's aid program to Pakistan is now on hold.  (Note: DCM separately briefed the Japanese on the integrated U.S. program for the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), and the Japanese took note of the U.S. willingness to take risks the GOJ was not.)  9. (C/NF) Comment: Many of the donor countries which make up this informal \"like minded\" group are groping for a response to Musharraf's November 3 actions.  Some of them, prompted by international NGOs and with relatively little aid at stake, are prematurely pushing for an immediate cut-off.  However, this \"useful lever\" can only be pulled once.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4837", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/15/2007 12:30", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004869  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 21, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: IMRAN KHAN DETAINED, BHUTTO AND CG LAHORE TALK POLITICS, TV STATIONS RESUME BROADCAST  REF: ISLAMABAD 4837  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  CNN, BBC and some local private TV news channels are back on the air.   CG Lahore met with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto, still under house arrest, in Lahore today.  The PPP announced it would try again to launch the \"long march\" from Lahore to Islamabad; the first convoy had dwindled last night to ten cars.  Imran Khan, leader of Pakistan Tehrik-e Insaf party has been re-arrested with the help of students affiliated with a religious party. Top Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz officials claimed that Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif have agreed to join forces in an anti-Musharraf campaign.  The Director General of Military Operations briefed the diplomatic corps on current Army operations in Swat and said that polling in the Northwest Frontier Province would be possible, but was \"unlikely\" in most of the Federally Administrated Tribal Areas.  The National Assembly's term ends today; we expect an announcement of a caretaker government today or tomorrow. Musharraf's current presidential term also ends today.  The Attorney General expects the Supreme Court to take up and complete its review of Musharraf's case \"by the end of next week,\" paving the way for the President to re-take his oath of office as a civilian.  Mission operations continued normally. End summary.  2.  (U) Pakistan Tehrik-e Insaf (PTI) Chairman Imran Khan was re-arrested by police on November 13 after escaping earlier from police custody.  Imran and his party claim that the leader was manhandled during the arrest by students from Islami Jamiat Talaba (IJT), a party affiliated with Jamaat-i-Islami (JI), and PTI has called for protests, to lash out against the treatment.  4. (U) Officials of the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N) claimed today that Bhutto and currently exiled Nawaz Sharif have agreed to join forces against President Musharraf.  The  PPP would not comment on the report; if true, this alliance would bring together two of the largest opposition parties in Pakistan.  5. (U) Local press reported on the decision by Harvard University Law School to award former Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry the Harvard Law Medal of Freedom for his contributions to freedom, justice, and equality in Pakistan. The school hopes that Chaudhry, who has been under house arrest since November 3, will be able to attend the awards ceremony once the state of emergency is lifted.  In a letter to the Supreme Court registrar, Chaudhry claims that an order has been issued in recent days to have him moved to Quetta or elsewhere for detainment.  6. (C) Director General of Military Operations General Pasha November 15 briefed 15 the diplomatic corps regarding the Army's operations in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and surrounding areas, such as Swat.  He said that the Army's focus on North and South Waziristan would be maintained.  Concerning the recently Army-led initiative in Swat, Pasha informed that peace should be reinstated \"within weeks.\"  He predicted that polling would be possible throughout the Frontier Province (NWFP), but \"unlikely\" in most of FATA.  7. (U) Peshawar: Police released Awami National Party (ANP) leaders and disbanded an ANP rally in Karak shortly after it started on November 14.  ANP also announced that it will hold NWFP protests on November 16.  The Khyber Union of Journalists began its three-day demonstration on November 14 before the Peshawar Press Club; so far, no violence has been reported.  Student rallies were reported at the University of Peshawar on November 14, and the lawyer boycott and protest camp continues at Peshawar High Court and other districts throughout the NWFP.  8. (U) Lahore: Consul General Lahore met with Benazir Bhutto and other PPP members, still under house arrest, to discuss elections and the next steps politically for Pakistan.  The PPP Lahore Chapter Secretary plans to lead another \"Long March\" from Shahdara on the outskirts of Lahore despite warnings by local police that they would be arrested.  This  ISLAMABAD 00004869  002 OF 002   announcement comes one day after the police arrested hundreds of PPP members who tried to continue with the first relatively unsuccessful \"Long March from Lahore to Islamabad.  As of last night, the long march had dwindled to ten cars.  9.(U) Karachi: The Karachi Union of Journalists staged a peaceful five-hour hunger strike on November 14 at the Press Club, and no arrests or injuries were reported.  In Lyari and Larkana, violent PPP protests continued in which armed men fired in the air, forced area shops to close, and were dispersed by police batons and tear gas.  The PPP Sindh president announced that these protests would continue until Bhutto is released.  Smaller rallies were held in Jacobabad, Thatta, Badin, and Ranipur where scattered reports indicated that police used batons and arrests to disperse the crowd. The ARY One World Bureau Chief and a journalist from the Urdu newspaper \"Awam\" were arrested by the Frontier Corps in Quetta on November 14 and moved to an unidentified location.  10. (U)  The National Assembly will complete, for the first time in Pakistani history, its full five year term today.  We expect the caretaker government to be announced today or tomorrow.  Musharraf's current term as President also ends today; under Pakistani law, an incumbent president remains in office until a successor is sworn in.  The Attorney General believes the Supreme Court will take up and complete the case against Musharraf \"by the end of next week,\" paving the way for Musharraf to resign as Chief of Army Staff and re-take the presidential oath of office as a civilian.  11. (U) DAWN, CNN, BBC, Sky News, and FOX are back on the air.  It is not confirmed whether these stations have agreed to the new, strenuous Code of Conduct that the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority announced would be required prior to allowing allegedly anti-government channels to be broadcasted. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4830|07ISLAMABAD4842", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2007 9:10", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004876  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 22, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: BHUTTO RELEASED AGAIN  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4830      B. ISLAMABAD 4842  Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission, Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b) , (d)  1. (C) Summary: The government this morning released PPP leader Benazir Bhutto and human rights activist Asma Jahangir. Senate Chairman Soomro today was sworn-in as Pakistan's caretaker prime minister. Musharraf amended the Provisional Constitutional Order to give the president and not the Chief of Army Staff authority to lift the state of emergency. The Karachi Stock Exchange continues to experience volatility. Heavy fighting continues in Swat. The government allowed all news channels, except GEO and ARY, back on the air. Isolated protests and demonstrations continue. Political and criminal violence is growing in Karachi's Lyari neighborhood where three people were yesterday shot and killed. Mission offices continue to operate normally. End summary.  2. (C) The government of Pakistan (GOP) released Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto from house arrest early this morning. Bhutto has not yet decided whether she will leave Lahore today, according to a mission contact; Pakistan broadcast media reported she will travel to Islamabad. Lahore CG also confirmed the GOP this morning released Human Rights Commission of Pakistan chairperson Asma Jahangir from house arrest, but we have no news on Aitzaz Ahsan's detention.  3. (U) Senate Chairman Soomro today was sworn-in as Pakistan's caretaker prime minister (refA), as was a caretaker cabinet. This cabinet will sit until elections are held and a new government is formed.  This is the first time in Pakistan's history that the assemblies have completed their full five year tenure.  4. (U) Musharraf amended the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) on Wednesday night, shifting the authority to lift the state of emergency from the Chief of Army Staff (COAS) to the president.  This will allow Musharraf--and not his successor to the post of COAS--to lift the state of emergency as president after he steps down from his post in the Army.  5. (C) The Karachi Stock Exchange (KSE) is down 0.26% on the day's opening at 13,145. The KSE is down 2.1% from its close of 13,423 on November 9 for the week and is down 1.0% from the November 5 low of 13,279 after the government enacted the state of emergency. Observers believe the volatility will continue until elections. The continuation of Salman Shah as Finance Minister in the caretaker government should provide an important signal to the market and international financial community that current market-based economic policies will continue under the caretaker government.  6. (C) Heavy fighting continues in Swat after the Army launched a counter-offensive against militants there. It is unclear if the government intends to use these operations as justification to lift the state of emergency once the operations are well under way (refB).  7. (U) The government is now allowing all news channels, except for GEO and ARY, to be broadcast on cable. The government has allowed some media groups back on the air without signing PEMRA's code of conduct.  8. (U) Peshawar: Demonstrations by opposition parties including Jamaat-i Islami (JI), Jamiat-i Ulema-i Islam (JUI-F), Awami National Party (ANP), and PPP are expected today in Peshawar's downtown area and throughout the NWFP. Lawyers, journalists, and students yesterday continued their protests in Peshawar and several Frontier Province (NWFP) cities. In Peshawar, police yesterday reportedly used tear gas and baton-charges to break-up a PPP rally.  In Battagram, police yesterday used similar tactics to disperse an ANP and JI sit-in that was blocking a highway.  9. (U) Karachi: Political and criminal violence is growing in Karachi's Lyari neighborhood where three people were yesterday shot and killed.  Those killed include two boys (aged 9 and 12) and one PPP activist. The police have been given shoot-to-kill orders if attacked in Lyari, which is the  ISLAMABAD 00004876  002 OF 002   center of PPP support in Karachi and the site of a long-term gang war between two large drug groups. Government arrest of PPP activists, opposition parties, and lawyers continued in Karachi, Hyderabad, Khaipur, and Larkana.  10. (U) Lahore:  Approximately 3000 students at Punjab University yesterday protested against the student faction of the conservative Islamist JI party for beating up and detaining opposition leader Imran Khan.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "06ISLAMABAD22157|07ISLAMABAD1178", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2007 12:11", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004888  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, ELAB, EINV, ETRD, SOCI, PK SUBJECT: SIALKOT ENTREPRENEURS DISCUSS SKILLED LABOR SHORTAGES, STATUS OF CHILD LABOR MONITORING  REF: ISLAMABAD 1178, 06 ISLAMABAD 22157  1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In a recent visit to the eastern Pakistani export center of Sialkot, Economic and USAID officers discussed the status of child labor monitoring and human resource development with private sector leaders.  Our contacts were generally upbeat in their assessment of business conditions, but cited government inattention to human resources and infrastructure as particularly troublesome. The Sialkot private sector continues to take the lead in both arenas, planning additional training centers and inaugurating the country's first privately financed commercial airport.  Our contacts believe that despite Nike's 2006 pull out of Sialkot on child labor concerns, factories are in compliance with international child labor standards.  However, nine months after the \"Sialkot Initiative\" pledged to expand independent monitoring of labor conditions, little has been done.  END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) EconOff and USAIDOff traveled to Sialkot, the center of Pakistan's export-oriented surgical tool, apparel and sporting goods industries November 1-2.  Roughly 70 percent of the world's hand-stitched soccer balls are produced in and around the city. While most industries report continued growth in export earnings, our contacts see inadequate skilled labor as a threat to the city's future prosperity.   Raja Ashfaq, CEO of surgical tool maker New Mark Industries, believes that his firm will be unable to compete internationally in the next five to ten years unless the public and private sectors address the lack of skilled labor.  Waseem Abbas, Vice Chairman of the Surgical Instruments Manufacturers Association (SIMAP), opined that government training facilities and apprentice programs do not adequately meet private sector needs.  SIMAP and other business associations plan to start their own training centers, independent of government funds.  3. (SBU) Private sector leadership is not restricted to vocational training.  Local entrepreneurs have taken the lead in the city's development, following inadequate government attention to Sialkot's infrastructure.  Participating Sialkot entrepreneurs contribute 0.5 percent of their of their export earnings to the Sialkot Development Fund, which has funded road improvements, the creation of a dry port, and the country's first privately financed commercial airport.  Despite the private sector's success, SIMAP Vice Chairman Abbas is concerned that the national and provincial governments now see Sialkot as \"self sufficient\" and will allocate fewer financial and other resources to vocational training center and infrastructure development.  INDEPENDENT MONITORING OF CHILD LABOR -------------------------------------  4. (SBU) All of our contacts in the sporting goods and surgical tools industries believe that child labor violations do not occur in large factories in Sialkot.  They did admit that violations had occurred in the past, particularly in subcontracted at-home soccer ball stitching centers.  Most export-oriented production factories have put into place extensive internal child labor screening procedures at the request of their international clients. In addition, the ILO set up an Independent Monitoring Association for Child Labor (IMAC) in 2002 to monitor and work against child labor in the sporting goods industry. The association is funded by participating members, all soccer ball manufacturers located in and around Sialkot. Despite IMAC's 2007 \"Sialkot Initiative\" to expand the association's mandate to monitor all labor conditions in multiple industries, little has been done.  5. (SBU) IMAC representatives and factory managers reported to EconOff that nine months later, most of the \"Sialkot Initiative\" proposals have not been implemented.  While monitors do report on working conditions other than the presence of child laborers, IMAC's members are still restricted to soccer ball manufacturers.  IMAC CEO Nasir Dogar reported that other industries have not shown interest in joining the association.  Several factory owners, including those at surgical tool maker Tecno Instruments, professed ignorance to IMAC's existence.  6. (SBU) IMAC CEO Dogar faults the Government of Pakistan (GOP) for not encouraging other industry groups to \"buy in\" to the monitoring program.  He described the GOP's monitoring efforts as an \"uncredible deterrent,\" fielding only four monitors to inspect the region's more than 5,000 stitching centers.  Dogar suggested that additional financial support by the ILO, coupled with increased GOP interest in the program, would be helpful in expanding IMAC's monitoring mandate.  7. (SBU) Increased scrutiny of child labor conditions in Sialkot's sporting goods industry came after Nike's 2006 decision to cease  ISLAMABAD 00004888  002 OF 002   doing business with a Sailkot-based supplier of soccer balls due to child labor concerns. The Sialkot area had been closely monitored and certified by the International Labor Organization (ILO) and UNICEF as free of major child labor violations for several years prior to this incident.  In response to Nike's 2006 pullout, the ILO called for an independent investigation of IMAC's functioning.  8. (SBU) Although IMAC received a passing grade by the ILO assessment team, it was evident to the ILO that the issues surrounding Nike's pullout of Sialkot could not be addressed under IMAC's previous mandate.  The ILO convened a stakeholders workshop in Islamabad in February 2007 to discuss expanding the Association's area of focus.  Conference participants produced the \"Sialkot Initiative\" aimed at enlarging IMAC's program scope beyond child labor to address all core international labor standards. Stakeholders agreed to seek increased government inspections and the expansion of IMAC's oversight to include industries other than soccer ball manufacturing.  COMMENT -------  9. (SBU) COMMENT: All of our contacts were unanimous in their assessment that the GOP is ineffective at both providing skills training and enforcing labor laws.  In Sialkot, the private sector took the initiative in infrastructure development and independent labor monitoring because it was in its self interest to do so. Convincing international buyers that child labor is a thing of the past benefits the bottom line.  Without active government monitoring of labor law compliance, there is an increased risk that factories with substandard labor conditions could go unnoticed.  10. (SBU) Post supports any assistance that can be provided to the ILO and IMAC to ensure that the \"Sialkot Initiative\" reforms succeed in transforming IMAC from a strictly child labor-oriented association to a national model for broad based, private sector-led labor initiatives.  We will continue to press the GOP to copy the Sialkot initiative on a national scale as one means to make Pakistan's exports more competitive.  END COMMENT.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4601", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2007 12:49", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004889  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  DEPT ALSO FOR PRM/ANE KABUL FOR REFCOORD  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, MASS, PK SUBJECT: FATA PLAN IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE  REF:  ISLAMABAD 4601  1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Post still awaits publication of the Central Command Planning Order that will formalize the security development plan (SDP).  Post appreciates funding for Pashto radio programming and the temporary FATA Coordinator, and will continue to urge Pakistani leadership to appoint a FATA czar for overall coordination.  Post briefed CENTCOM's Admiral Fallon, developed a public information strategy, and is moving ahead with USAID education assistance and DEA training.  END SUMMARY.  FATA Coordination ----------------- 2.  (SBU) Hank Hendrickson arrived November 15 in Islamabad to assume responsibility as the Mission's FATA coordinator.  We continue to urge the GOP to appoint a FATA czar as their government's point of contact for effective overarching coordination.  ODRP:  Training Center and Border Coordination --------------------------------------------- - 3.  (SBU) Equipment issues should not delay the initial training course at the Frontier Corps Training Center.  The contractor is confident it can meet the January 15 delivery date for the required \"train the trainer\" equipment.  The initial shipment will go to Warsak or Peshawar to simplify distribution and subsequent deliveries will be coordinated with Frontier Corps Headquarters. With a 90-day lead time, all equipment could conceivably be in Pakistan by March 2008.  A contractor site survey from November 15-19 will give us a better timeline for infrastructure.  4.  (SBU) \"Border coordination center\" (BCC) is the new name for the former \"border surveillance center\", a change made by the Combined Joint Task Force-82 (CJTF-82) in Afghanistan, with concurrence from the Afghan National Army and Pakistani military leadership.  The new name emphasizes coordination and dispels misperceptions about the BCCs as intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance facilities. The Torkham BCC should be operational by March 2008; construction of the Lwara Dashte BCC is delayed, pending resolution of contractor and materials security.  The original BCC budget assumed Afghan military security, but the Afghans said they were unable to provide it, so CJTF-82 looked at a contracted option.  Contracted security would be expensive and ODRP is unwilling to pay for it by diverting funds from Frontier Corps projects.  ODRP wants the Afghan military to honor their commitment.  5.  (SBU) Post briefed Admiral Fallon on its FATA efforts during his November 2 visit.  We eagerly await publication of the Central Command Planning Order, the tasking authority to implement SDP.  Public Diplomacy ---------------- 6. (SBU) The Public Affairs Section (PAS) has developed multiple strategies to build public support of Pakistan's FATA development plan and public acceptance and support for its social, political, and economic objectives.  The strategies will be coordinated with the FATA Secretariat in close cooperation with USAID/OTI; details will be provided septel.  PAS is collecting input from other Mission offices to establish a page on the Mission web site that outlines USG assistance in the FATA.  7. (SBU) A military information support team (MIST) assessment group briefed Post on November 15 on their evaluation of the environment for information operations in Islamabad and Peshawar.  Their plan is to coordinate with all Mission agencies, develop a positive message, and develop capabilities to aid both USG and Pakistan information campaigns.  PAS will coordinate their efforts with resources that the MIST can offer.  USAID ----- 8. (SBU) USAID signed a USD 90 million cooperative agreement for education, with USD 40 million planned for the FATA.  USAID will begin a mapping exercise to assess basic enrollment and school data, and work with the FATA Secretariat's Directorate of Education to increase educational capacity and management.  9. (SBU) Mark Ward, USAID Senior Deputy Assistant Administrator for Asia and the Near East, visited Peshawar October 28-30 for  ISLAMABAD 00004889  002 OF 002   discussions with key FATA officials regarding the FATA program and to discuss possible areas of cooperation.  He also awarded scholarships to FATA students for study in Peshawar; visited a USAID-funded Campus Radio Station at University of Peshawar; and spoke with students at the Lincoln Corner about the FATA program.  DEA --- 10. (SBU) The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is working with DOD to secure funding to deploy TDY teams of counter narcotics contract trainers to Pakistan.  Funded under a related program for Afghanistan, the teams would provide sustained counter narcotics training to the Frontier Corps at the Warsak Center, coordinated by DEA and ODRP. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4365|07ISLAMABAD4830", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/16/2007 12:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004890  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PINR, AEMR, KFLO, CASC SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF NAMES CARETAKER CABINET  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4830      B. ISLAMABAD 4365  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: As expected and provided for under the constitution, Musharraf named a caretaker cabinet when the National Assembly's term ended on November 15.  Caretaker governments will be named for the provinces beginning November 20.  These caretaker governments will serve until new assemblies are elected, scheduled for early January 2008.  Under the caretaker system, Musharraf continues as President, and the current Armed Forces leadership remains in place.  Please see para 9 for bios of key new officials.  End summary.  Caretaker Cabinet -----------------  2. (C) The Pakistan Constitution requires that, upon dissolution of the National Assembly, the president appoints a caretaker government (ref B).  According to the Constitution, \"The caretaker Prime Minister is not eligible to contest the immediately following election.  Upon dissolution of the four Provincial Assemblies the governors may, with the previous approval of the President, also appoint caretaker provincial cabinets.  The caretaker Chief Ministers are not eligible to contest the immediately following election.\"  3. (C) Under the Constitution, the president has discretionary power to appoint a caretaker government, and there are no requirements that its members have any specific qualifications or be non-partisan.  In fact, most of Pakistan's caretaker governments have been decidedly and disastrously partisan.  While there is an historical pretext for a technocratic caretaker government, the current highly charged political atmosphere indicates we are unlikely to see that kind of government this time.  4. (U) On November 16, President Musharraf named 24 caretaker cabinet ministers, plus a caretaker prime minister (listed below).  The Caretaker Prime Minister is Mohammed Mian Soomro (ref A), who will also retain his current job as Chairman of the Senate.  He replaces Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz.  In the coming days, Musharraf is expected to announce caretakers for the rest of Pakistan's 38 federal ministries.  Prime Minister: Mohammed Mian Soomro Foreign Affairs Minister: Inamul Haq Defense Minister: Saleem Abbas Jilani Finance/Revenue Minister: Salman Shah Trade/Commerce Minister: Shahzada Alam Mannoo Interior Minister: General (retd) Hamid Nawaz Khan Information Minister: Nisar Memon Law/Justice Minister: Syed Afzal Haider Kashmir Affairs Minister: Abbas Sarfaraz Minority Affairs Minister: Raja Tri Deve Roy Women/Social Development Minister: Shahida Jamil Human Rights Minister: Ansar Burney Information Tech Minister: Abdullah Riar Culture/Sports Minister: Sakindar Jogezai Tourism/Youth Minister: Muhammad Ali Saif Environment Minister: Wajid H. Bokhari Labor Minister: Nisar Ghuman Science/Technology Minister: Shamas Lakha Food/Livestock Minister: Prince Isa Khan Ports/Shipping Minister: Faheem Ansari Communications Minister: Habibur Rahman Petroleum/Natural Resources Minister: Ehsanullah Khan Housing/Works Minister: Lala Nisar Ahmed Khan Religious Affairs Minister: Khawaja Ataullah Industries/Production Minister: Salman Taseer  Elections ---------  5. (U) For the first time in Pakistan's history, the National Assembly completed its full, five-year term on November 15. In this regard, Pakistan's Constitution, though currently in abeyance, was followed.  Musharraf's November 11 commitment  ISLAMABAD 00004890  002 OF 003   to hold parliamentary elections by January 9, 2008, is also in keeping with the 60-day window prescribed by the Constitution.  National and provincial elections will be scheduled for the same day, and we expect Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) to announce a date certain sometime next week.  The Presidency --------------  6. (U) Musharraf's term as President should have likewise expired on November 15; however, a president remains in office until a successor is elected and sworn in.  Musharraf is waiting for the reconstituted Supreme Court to confirm that he was eligible to stand for the election he won on October 6.  Musharraf has stated that he will resign as Chief of Army Staff (COAS) and take the presidential oath of office as a civilian as soon as the Court rules on his case.  We expect the Court to take up this case next week.  7. (U) Pakistan's Armed Forces continue to report to the President.  Comment -------  8. (C) Although an unusual procedure, naming a caretaker government is normal for Pakistan, and it allows the country to move forward to scheduled parliamentary elections in January 2008.  Given Musharraf's November 3 decision to impose a state of emergency and suspend the Constitution, the GOP hopes that this step of naming a caretaker government will indicate that the political situation is on the road back to normalcy.  Because Musharraf did not consult, as promised, with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto in advance of the composition of the caretaker government, we expect her and other opposition leaders to criticize the composition of this cabinet.  Short Bios ----------  9. (C) Below are short bios for key caretaker cabinet members.  Prime Minister, Muhammad Mian Soomro (ref A).  Soomro is currently Chairman of Pakistan's Senate.  He is a self-effacing member of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML).  Soomro represents an established Sindh feudal family.  Appointed by Musharraf, Soomro was Governor of Sindh 2000-2002.  He entered the Senate in 2003, and was re-elected in 2006 to a six-year term.  Previously, he worked as an international banker with a number of institutions, including Bank of America.  He was born on August 19, 1960, and has a bachelors from Forman Christian College and a masters from Punjab University.  He also studied operations management at Northrop University.  Foreign Affairs Minister, Inamul Haq.  Haq served as Pakistan's UN PermRep 1999-2000.  He joined the diplomatic corps in 1965.  Before his tenure at the UN, he served at numerous posts, including as Ambassador to Turkey, 1992-1996, and China, 1997-1999.  He has also served abroad in Nigeria, Portugal, and Saudi Arabia.  Haq was born in November 1940. He holds a masters in English Language and Literature.  Defense Minister, Saleem Abbas Jilani.  Jilani served as Defense Secretary 1989-1996.  Finance Minister, Salman Shah.  Shah is already a close Embassy contact and has been de facto finance minister since Shaukat Aziz became prime minister in 2004.  Shah has advised PM Aziz on finance, revenue, economic affairs and statistics.  He was a key player in the GOP's economic reforms program, begun in late 1999.  He previously served as Chairman of the Privatization Commission of Pakistan and has been a board member of the State Bank of Pakistan, Bank of Punjab, Foundation University and Pakistan International Airlines. He earned his PhD in Finance from Indiana University Kelley School of Business Administration.  Trade/Commerce Minister, Shahzada Alam Mannoo.  Mannoo hails  ISLAMABAD 00004890  003 OF 003   from one the oldest industrialist families on the sub-continent and started in his father's Calcutta rubber business in 1940.  Mannoo migrated to Pakistan in 1971. Today, he is Chairman of the Mannoo Group, one of Pakistan's largest industrial conglomerates, including a car assembly plant and sugar mills.  He stays active in various chambers of commerce throughout the country and previously headed the powerful All Pakistan Textile Manufacturers Association.  Interior Minister, General (retd) Hamid Nawaz Khan.  Khan served as Defense Secretary 2001-2005.  Information Minister, Nisar Memon.  Memon served as caretaker Information Minister in 1993, and as Information Minister and Frontier Regions Minister under Musharraf.  He is a respected businessman from Sindh, who sits on the boards of PSO, ALICO and CALCORP.  Memon was elected in 2003 as a PML Senator and re-elected in 2006 to a six-year term.  He earned his masters of science from Karachi University.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4876", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/17/2007 10:09", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004895  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/17/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 23, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: NEGROPONTE VISTS; GEO TV SHUT DOWN  REF: ISLAMABAD 4876  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Deputy Secretary met with National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz and telephoned Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto November 16; he met with President Musharraf and Vice Chief of Army Staff Kayani on November 17.   The GOP officially shut down Geo TV overnight, which had skirted the media blackout by broadcasting from Dubai.  Three Supreme Court justices are threatening to opt out of hearing petitions against the imposition of emergency. Protests and demonstrations continue around the country.  The wife of attorney Aitzaz Ahsan visited him in jail and reported he is physically fine. Mission offices continue to operate normally. End summary.  2. (U) After meeting with National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz in Islamabad of November 16, Deputy Secretary telephoned Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto to discuss the current political environment.  The Deputy Secretary met November 18 with Vice Chief of Staff Kayani and President Musharraf.  3. (C)  According to Geo TV, the GOP November 16 pressured the United Arab Emirates to shut down transmission of Geo and ARY TV from Dubai.  According to Geo owner Mir Shakil ur Rehman, the owners in Dubai have been accused of being \"American agents.\" Both Geo and ARY are now off the air in Pakistan.  4. (U) Citing \"judicial propriety,\" three of eleven justices on the newly reconstituted Supreme Court have announced they may recuse themselves from hearing petitions challenging the imposition of a state of emergency.  President Musharraf used the decision of these three judges to re-open Islamabad's Red Mosque as one example of judicial excess that precipitated the need for a state of emergency.  5.  (U)  The wife of Aitzaz Ahsan, President of the Supreme Court Bar Association, saw her husband in jail today and reported that he was physically fine.  There have been rallies of lawyers in the U.S. and elsewhere demonstrating against his detention, and there were concerns that he might have been abused in custody.  6.  (C)  Mushaid Hussain, General Secretary of Musharraf's Pakistan Muslim League party, today publicly called for Musharraf to lift the state of emergency before the elections.  7. (U) Peshawar: Throughout the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), significant protests took place on November 16. Eight protesters were arrested following a PPP protest in Bannu.  Mutahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA) members held relatively peaceful protests in several districts, with the biggest being in Peshawar, where hundreds of MMA activists rallied before the Namak Mandi Mosque.  The Awami National Party (ANP) also protested throughout the province, including Peshawar.  Members and party leaders blocked provincial roads and clashed with police, resulting in further arrests. Jamait Ulema-i-Islam (JUI-F) and ANP took part in a joint protest in Malakand (Swat) where police arrested a former ANP parliamentarian and a JUI-F Senator.  ANP, JUI-F, and PPP held a joint rally in the Hangu district. Lawyers and journalists continued to protest against the emergency and the curbs on the media.  PPP plans to stage a demonstration in Khyber agency today.  8. (U) Lahore: According to media reports, Pakistan Tehreek e-Insaf (PTI) leader Imran Khan was transferred November 16 from Lahore to a prison in Dera Ghazi Khan near the Punjab-Balochistan border.  PTI members have also announced that they will not participate in any multi-party conferences until their leader is released.  9. (U) Karachi: PPP protests continued in Lyari on November 16, but there were no reports of arrests or gunfire.  The Deputy District Officer granted bail to 35 PPP activists.  ISLAMABAD 00004895  002 OF 002   Members of the JUI-F protested against the emergency and threw stones at the police in Larkhana, and police used tear gas and batons to disperse the crowd.  No arrests were made, but JUI-F claimed that five of its members were injured. Throughout the rest of Sindh, several other protests took place, including a JUI-F rally in Shikarpur, a PPP protest in Thatta and Hyderabad (resulting in arrests), and a journalist hunger strike at the Nushahro Feroze Press Club. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4895", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/19/2007 13:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004925  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PINR, PREL SUBJECT: MGPK01: SITREP 24, AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD: ANTI-MUSHARRAF PETITIONS DISMISSED; GEO TV STILL SHUT DOWN; OPPOSITION CONSIDERING NEXT MOVES  REF: ISLAMABAD 4895  Classified By: DCM Peter W. Bodde, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The reconstituted Supreme Court dismissed most of the petitions against Musharraf's re-election when opposition attorneys refused to recognize the panel's authority.  One petition remains for a November 22 hearing. Depending on the outcome of the case, Musharraf may be free to take the presidential oath of office as early as this Thursday.  Pakistani press gave wide coverage to the Deputy Secretary's November 16-18 visit.  Geo and ARY TV stations  SIPDIS remain off the air.  Opposition representatives will meet in Islamabad late November 19 to decide whether to contest elections, even if under a state of emergency.  There were scattered demonstrations in Pakistan's largest cities November 18-19, with limited arrests.  Mission offices continue to operate normally.  End summary.  2. (C) On November 19, a 10-justice Supreme Court panel threw out five of six petitions against Musharraf's re-election for \"lack of prosecution.\"  Opposition lawyers, including for Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Makhdoom Amin Faheem and the lawyers' Wajihuddin Ahmad, refused to recognize the reconstituted bench.  Some lawyers argued in court that the pre-emergency 11-justice panel should be returned.  Other lawyers did not even show up to court.  The Court deferred to November 22 one final petitioner.  That petition is widely viewed as frivolous and was actually dismissed by the pre-emergency Court.  Assuming a quick dismissal of this final petition, President Musharraf may be able to take the presidential oath as early as November 22.  3. (C) The reconstituted Supreme Court also heard arguments November 19 against the proclamation of emergency and provisional constitution order.  We expect this case to continue for a couple days more.  4. (U) Urdu- and English-language press gave wide coverage of the Deputy Secretary's recent visit and departing statement. Most articles highlighted D's call that elections not be held under a state of emergency.  5. (U) Local media also reported that President Musharraf will travel to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, November 20-21.  6. (U) \"Solidarity demonstrations\" were planned for November 19 in front of Geo TV offices in Islamabad and Karachi to protest the complete cut in operations of GEO TV and ARY TV stations.  Other local and international broadcasters are on the air though.  7. (C) Attorney General Malik Qayyum warned November 18 that Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto could still face corruption charges.  Qayyum predicted that Musharraf's October 5 National Reconciliation Ordinance might be overturned by the Supreme Court.  (Note: Qayyum told the Ambassador November 7 that the Ordinance was poorly drafted and likely unconstitutional.)  The Court has yet to set a date to review the Ordinance.  8. (C) Parties making up the opposition All Pakistan Democratic Movement (APDM) are meeting in Islamabad late November 19 to decide whether they will participate in parliamentary elections, even if under a state of emergency. They will also discuss whether to take any joint action with the PPP.  It appears that the religious parties, particularly Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam (JUI-F), will contest elections.  The nationalist parties, such as the Awami National Party (ANP), have reportedly made no final decisions but are leaning toward participating.  And Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) is undecided.  All these parties, including the PPP, boycotted an Election Commission meeting called today to review election rules.  9. (C) Supreme Court Bar Association president and lawyers' movement leader Aitzaz Ahsan remains at Adiala Prison, Rawalpindi.  After Embassy discussed this case with National  ISLAMABAD 00004925  002 OF 002   Security Advisor Tariq Aziz and Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao, Ahsan's wife (Bushra Aitzaz) and daughter (Saman Ahsan) were able to visit him November 17 and planned to see him again November 19 and 20.  Post is in direct contact with both.  They report that Ahsan appears to be physically fine and has received his medicines.  Ahsan is completely cut off from any other communications, however, beyond these small, monitored encounters.  10. (U) Karachi: The Karachi Union of Journalists will demonstrate November 19, although the timing remains unannounced to avoid pre-emptive mass arrests.  Political parties conducted small protests in various parts of Sindh. PPP Women's Wing marched in Larkhana November 18, resulting in a handful of arrests.  Journalists protested November 18 outside of press clubs in numerous Balochistan cities/towns. No arrests were reported.  Sindh's and Balochistan's caretaker chief ministers were sworn in November 19.  11. (U) Lahore: An 18-member caretaker provincial cabinet, including caretaker chief minister Sheikh Ejaz Nisar, was sworn in November 19 in Lahore.  CG Lahore reports that Nisar is close to his immediate predecessor, Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi.  PPP contacts do not believe Nisar will be a neutral caretaker through the elections process.  12. (U) Peshawar: Small protests by lawyers and journalists are expected November 19 in Peshawar and in several other Frontier Province (NWFP) districts (Mardan, Dir and Kohat). November 18 demonstrations were limited, with only a couple by Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) and a couple in Swabi by lawyers and journalists.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE152088", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/20/2007 1:55", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004926  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ETTC, KTFN, KCRM, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCE: PAKISTAN FOLLOW-UP TO ACTION REQUEST ON ILLICIT CASH COURIERS  REF: STATE 152088  1. (U) The following is Embassy Islamabad's response to reftel request for additional information on illicit cash couriers.  2. (SBU) Pakistan places statutory limits on the international transportation of currency.  The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) legally allows individuals to carry up to USD 10,000 in US dollars or foreign currency equivalent.  According to the Central Board of Revenue, couriers caught carrying more than the maximum amount are subject prosecution and prison terms of between three to five years.   3. (SBU) While it is technically illegal to bring more than USD 10,000 into Pakistan except through legal banking channels, there are no reporting requirements upon entering or exiting the country. There are joint SBP-Customs counters at international airports to monitor the transportation of foreign currency.  However, enforcement is insufficient.  Post contacts at the State Bank of Pakistan report that charges are rarely filed for exceeding currency importation limits and can recall only two cases in recent memory.   4. (SBU) In June 2004, the State Bank of Pakistan required all informal money changers (or hawaladars) to register as authorized foreign exchange dealers and meet minimum capital requirements.  The regulation has had limited success in consolidating the national foreign exchange regime, subjecting it to more stringent regulation and accounting standards.  Despite the SBP's efforts, unlicensed hawalas still operate illegally in parts of the country (particularly Peshawar and Karachi).  The informal and secretive nature of the unlicensed hawalas makes it difficult for SBP regulators to effectively combat their operations.  Most illicit funds are transacted through these unlicensed operators.  5. (SBU) The U.S. Department of Homeland Security conducted a cash courier training seminar in May 2006 and plans to hold more training sessions in the future.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4890", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/20/2007 13:48", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 004947  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN GENERAL ELECTIONS CALLED FOR JANUARY 8  REF: ISLAMABAD 4890  1. (SBU) Summary: Chief Election Commissioner Justice (retd) Qazi Muhammad Farooq announced November 20 that Pakistan will hold general elections for the National and Provincial Assemblies on January 8, 2008.  Opposition parties were quick to question the credibility of elections under the current state of emergency.  End summary.  2. (U) Chief Election Commissioner Justice (retd) Qazi Muhammad Farooq called Pakistan's general elections for January 8, 2008.  All 342 National Assembly seats will be filled -- 272 are directly contested districts and 70 are reserved for women and specific minority groups.  Party candidates will contest a total of 728 seats in the Provincial Assemblies of Punjab, Sindh, Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) and Balochistan.  3. (U) Farooq also announced November 20 the election timetable. Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) will accept nomination papers up to November 26, will then scrutinize candidates to confirm their eligibility, and will issue the final list of candidates on December 16.  4. (U) In his November 20 remarks, Farooq assured the Pakistani public that these general elections would be \"transparent in every respect.\"  He requested political parties' cooperation.  Lastly, Farooq said Pakistan welcomed international observers.  5. (U) Opposition Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) was the first to react publicly to Farooq's election timetable.  PML-N Information Secretary Ahsan Iqbal called the election announcement \"a fraud.\"  SIPDIS He questioned how campaigns were to go forward with opposition leaders jailed, under house arrest, or exiled.  PML-N Chairperson Raja Zafarul Haq held out the possibility that his party would boycott the elections if held under a state of emergency.  6. (SBU) Meanwhile, Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Spokesman Farhatullah Babar stated that his party had yet to decide if they would contest elections under emergency restrictions.  He added that the PPP hoped to consult with other opposition parties.  Other opposition parties withheld public comments, echoing PPP's line that they had yet to review, consult or decide on the matter.  Most of these other parties have indicated privately to EmbOffs that they too will likely stand for elections, with Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) the possible exception.  7. (SBU) Comment: Today's announcement of the electoral schedule poses a dilemma for the opposition.  Some of them clearly want to boycott the elections, while others appear willing to contest elections that they simultaneously complain are unfair.  Most of the opposition parties will wait for the PPP's decision.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4817", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/21/2007 11:45", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004962  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EAID, ECON, PGOV, PK, PINR, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: EXPANDED USAID PROGRAM IN PAKISTAN  REF:    ISLAMABAD 04817  1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY: This cable is a follow-up to reftel. In reftel, Post recommended that the $200 million cash transfer could be projectized.  We believe funds currently used for the cash transfer could be more productively used for other USG programs that directly benefit the Pakistani people and make Pakistan a stronger and more secure ally in the war against terror.  This cable outlines the skeleton of a three-year, $600 million program that could be implemented by USAID with three additional US Direct Hires, seven US Personal Services Contractors, and 21 additional FSN staff.  The program would be carried out through US contractors and grantees who would work with provincial and local governments as well as Pakistani NGOs and private sector organizations.  If funds are allowed in the spring of 2008, implementing partners could begin operations in early calendar 2009.  2.  (SBU)  Most of the program ($340 million) focuses on education, which we believe is fundamental to moving Pakistan toward democracy, prosperity, and stability.  The education component is comprehensive - training teachers, building schools, providing scholarships Q with the premise that these actions will reduce the number of children exposed to extremist teachings.  Second, the program devotes $130 million to improve child and maternal health, thereby allowing the US to visibly touch the lives of millions of Pakistanis and fill a critical need.  Third, the program devotes $130 million for job training for unemployed youth, for generating jobs by building small infrastructure in communities, and for helping farmers get out of poverty.  EDUCATION IS KEY  3.  (SBU)  Pakistan is falling far short of its obligation to provide high-quality basic education for its children.  We propose five focused activities which would significantly strengthen education, and have the important side effect of making secular education more attractive than Madrassa education.  4.  (SBU)  First, a major cause of problems in basic education in Pakistan is that the teachers themselves are poorly trained.  USAID will improve existing teacher training programs by strengthening pre-service teacher education institutions such as Allama Iqbal Open University, Punjab, Peshawar, Gomal, Hazara, Balochistan, Sindh, and Hyderabad by training their staff, and developing and implementing new curriculum. This three-year activity would help 38,000 teachers meet acceptable international standards in both knowledge of subject matter and classroom teaching skills.  It would have a long-term impact as future generations of PakistanQs teachers will continue to receive a far better preparation for teaching. ($70 million).  5.  (SBU)  Second, USAID will rebuild or renovate up to 3,000 schools using a US contractor with local subcontractors.  This may include the GOPQs new Dar Ul Ilm program (House of Knowledge), which is planning to build boarding schools for needy children.  Dar Ul Ilm would provide religious instruction as well as secular instruction to directly compete with madrassas. ($110 million).  6.  (SBU) Third, USAID would build an additional 30 schools in the area affected by the 2005 earthquake. These additional schools are badly needed to replace schools that were damaged or destroyed. ($45 million). Fourth, we would support the GOPQs early childhood education program, providing young children with a critical foundation for learning. Our support would benefit 175,000 children.  (This would also help lessen the appeal of madrassas, which take in children as young as three and a half years.) ($50 million).  ISLAMABAD 00004962  002 OF 003   Fifth, we would provide more opportunity for leaders to develop from the less advantaged parts of society by awarding up to 6,500 scholarships for study in Pakistan or the US to intellectually talented students currently without the financial means to pursue higher education. ($65 million).  HEALTH CARE  7.  (SBU)  The health of young children and mothers in Pakistan is among the worst in the world; for example, 95 children under five years of age die for every 1,000 live births compared to 8 in the US.  To address this desperate need, a $130 million program will extend essential health services to families in 27 of the poorest districts in the country where neither USAID nor other donors are concentrating.  This would have an immediate benefit by decreasing deaths of infants, young children, and mothers, and improving their overall health.  The program would provide life-saving skills to 5,000 midwives and the emergency staff of 75 hospitals.  We could substantially increase the number of fully immunized children by helping the local governments run more vaccination campaigns.  This program parallels the current USAID-funded Pakistan Initiative for Mothers and Newborns.  It would benefit more than two million children under the age of five and roughly six million married couples.  JOBS  8.  (SBU)  There is an enormous unmet need for job training in Pakistan.  The GOP has been unable to develop training programs which address the needs of an increasingly hi tech, services-based economy. While PakistanQs private sector has begun to provide job training on a small scale, the combination of government and private sector programs is clearly insufficient.  At the same time, Pakistan needs to generate over 2 million new jobs per year because of its demographic bulge.  We will support a training program that provides job skills specifically aimed at areas that businesses say they need, and life skills that help youth find and keep jobs.  The program will reach approximately 250,000 poor youth from rural and urban areas throughout Pakistan.  The program will work on the model of an existing program, The Education and Employment Alliance, and similar programs in other countries.  The Alliance is implemented internationally by the International Youth Foundation and in Pakistan by the National Rural Support Network.  It provides three- to six- month training programs for unemployed youth, targeted at the skills businesses need. ($75 million).  9.  (SBU)  The GOP has underinvested in infrastructure for many years.  Approximately 500 small community infrastructure projects such as roads, irrigation, sanitation, and power can be built.  Such infrastructure projects are excellent, highly public examples to show that the US cares about the Pakistani people.  Since contracting is done by local subcontractors, hired and managed by US companies, they generate jobs immediately.  Often, the infrastructure promotes business development, thus opening additional employment opportunities.  Projects must meet predetermined criteria for social and economic impact; selection maybe done by local mayors in consultation with city and/or provincial leaders.($25 million).  10.  (SBU)  Agriculture employs 40-50% of PakistanQs workers, including about 65% of working women and 80% of the nationQs poor.  USG programs will increase farmers' incomes by enhancing their production techniques, improving their linkages to markets, and developing the food processing industry.  Studies show that increased farm income is a very powerful generator of rural jobs.  The new funds will expand a successful USAID program to additional districts  ISLAMABAD 00004962  003 OF 003   along or near the Afghan border in Balochistan and other strategic areas as well as coordinate key players in the private sector and provincial agricultural ministries. ($30 million).  COMMENT  11.  (SBU)  The Mission believes that the programs outlined above would address fundamental problems that block PakistanQs progress and stability, and would significantly strengthen one of our key allies in the global war on terror while making very clear our commitment to creating better lives for PakistanQs people.  With a relatively modest increase in staff, USAID can effectively manage new, additional programs in education, health care and employment.  The new program would redefine our development relationship: we would remain close partners with the Government of Pakistan, but funding would come directly from USAID through contractors and grantees, increasing direct benefits to the Pakistani people and accountability for US taxpayer money.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE89511", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/21/2007 13:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004964  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  DEPARTMENT FOR ISN, EUR, T, NEA, SCA, EAP, WHA  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/21/2017 TAGS: EFIN, IR, KNNP, PARM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON IDENTIFIER INFORMATION ON ENTITIES LISTED in UNSCRS 1737 AND 1747  REF: STATE 89511  Classified by: DCM Peter Bodde for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)  (C) Econoffs met with Ministry of Finance Additional Secretary Muhammad Javed Malik and Ministry of Foreign Affairs Americas Desk Director Mansoor Ahmad Khan to share identifier and background information on entities and individuals listed in the Annexes to UNSCRs 1737 and 1747 on November 15.  Econ Counselor requested that the Government of Pakistan (GOP) provide any additional information on these individuals and entities to the USG. Officials at both Ministries pledged that appropriate action would be taken on our request in coordination with other GOP agencies.  Our interlocutors promised to provide feedback.  Post will follow up and report any results.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07SECSTATE158268", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/21/2007 13:20", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004965  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/17/2017 TAGS: CVIS, PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR INVITES PAKISTAN TO ANNAPOLIS  REF: SECSTATE 158268 (NOTAL)  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Ambassador called on Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) caretaker Foreign Minister (FM) Inamul Haq 21 November to invite him to attend the November 26-27 conference in Washington and Annapolis to advance Arab-Israeli peace. FM Haq pleasantly and courteously said he would need a few days to decide if he would be able to attend, citing speculation that the conference might be delayed, and responsibilities pertaining to planning for elections and dealing with the state of emergency. FM Haq suggested MFA Director General Ghalib Iqbal, who also attended the meeting and follows the Middle East, might be a suitable candidate to attend if he cannot go. Meeting touched on additional topics and post will report on them septel. End Summary.  2. (C) Ambassador called on MFA FM Inamul Haq to invite him to the November 26-27 conference in Washington and Annapolis to advance Arab-Israeli peace and rally international support for the parties' efforts (as per reftel). DG Ghalib Iqbal and PolOff joined the meeting. Ambassador told FM Haq we would value and welcome his attendance. Ambassador noted the Secretary and the President would be in attendance, as will  SIPDIS Palestinian President Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Olmert. Ambassador highlighted other conference events.  3. (C) FM Haq politely thanked Ambassador for the invitation, but said he heard rumors the conference might be delayed because the Israelis and Palestinians had not yet resolved a joint communique that is supposed to precede the meeting. Ambassador responded we will inquire with Washington about the status of the communique and reiterated our interest in Pakistan participating in the conference. FM Haq said he would deliver and discuss the invitation with Musharraf and the caretaker Prime Minister. FM Haq noted that work in Pakistan--elections, the state of emergency, and multilateral talks--might prevent him from attending. FM Haq suggested DG Ghalib Iqbal might be a good candidate to attend if his responsibilities prevent him from traveling to the US.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/21/2007 15:14", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004968  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF'S MEETING WITH JORDAN'S KING ABDALLAH  Classified By: Polcouns Candace Putnam, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) During a November 1 meeting between King Abdallah II of Jordan and President Musharraf in Islamabad, the two heads of state focused their brief discussion primarily on trade issues and the situation in the Middle East.  The visit to Pakistan by King Abdallah was the third stop on a tour that also included visits to Bahrain and China.  According to the Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the one-on-one talks were \"optimistic\" and \"consultative\" in nature, however, no substantive decisions were made. King Abdallah called for the acceleration of efforts to sign a trade deal with Pakistan, but the two countries are still in the process of determining what commodities will be discussed.  President Musharraf and King Abdallah spoke generally about the situation in the West Bank/Gaza and Iraq.  President Musharraf was particularly concerned about continuing attacks on religious sites and shrines in Iraq.  The two also discussed ways to expand relations in the fields of trade, investment, science, and culture.  King Abdallah expressed support for Pakistan's counterterrorism efforts and the need to use one voice in dealing with G-8 countries.  Finally, the two leaders agreed that the standoff with Iran could only be resolved through diplomacy and dialogue. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4965", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/23/2007 12:07", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004990  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2017 TAGS: AEMR, AMGT, CASC, KFLO, PGOV, PINR, PK, PREL SUBJECT: WEEKLY ROUNDUP: COURT CLEARS WAY FOR MUSHARRAF'S NEXT TERM  REF: ISLAMABAD 4965  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  The Supreme Court dismissed the final case challenging Musharraf's candidate eligibility, clearing the way for him to re-take the presidential oath of office as a civilian, possibly as early as this weekend.  Musharraf issued new constitutional amendments to provide himself legal indemnity for suspending the constitution and actions taken during the state of emergency; this could lead him to lift the state of emergency, but when is unclear.  The Court also validated the state of emergency and provisional constitutional order by ruling on two government-sponsored petitions.  Despite talk of an elections boycott, the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and the block of religious parties are filing candidate nomination papers. The Commonwealth suspended Pakistan's membership, but this has no automatic effect on donor aid. The government released some prominent opposition political figures, but it continues to detain leading judges and lawyers. The government of Dubai authorized ARY to resume media broadcasts; Geo remains off the air.  Sporadic protests by opposition political parties, journalists and lawyers continue across the country.  End summary.  2. (C) The Supreme Court dismissed November 22 the final case challenging Musharraf's eligibility to serve another term as President. The court is set to deliver a short order, which clears the way for the Election Commission to validate the October 6 election results.  Musharraf will probably step down from his post in the Army--perhaps as early as this weekend--before taking an oath of office as a civilian.  3. (C) On November 21, Musharraf issued seven constitutional amendments that provide him with indemnity for the November 3 provisional constitutional order and proclamation of emergency.  The next National Assembly must ratify these amendments by a two-thirds majority; otherwise, Musharraf could later face treason charges for abrogating the constitution.  Under these new amendments, the January 8 election and the judicial oath taken by new justices will be considered constitutional (septel).  On November 23, the Court ruled on two petitions, sponsored behind-the-scenes by the government, and declared that the state of emergency and the provisional constitutional order were legal.  5. (C) Recently deported former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is preparing to return to Pakistan, according to press reports. Musharraf met with Saudi King Abdullah earlier in the week, and Sharif reportedly is traveling from Riyadh to Jeddah November 23 to meet with the king.  It is unclear if Nawaz will be allowed to return by November 26, the last day possible to file candidate nominations papers.  6. (U) In a key development, People's Party of Pakistan (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto said her party will submit nomination papers.  Although the PPP could still decide to boycott the elections, the PPP's decision to move forward will discourage other parties from boycotting.  7. (C) The religious parties' coalition, which includes the Jamaat-i Islami (JI) and Jamiat-i Ulema-i-Islam-Falzur (JUI-F) parties, met November 22 and decided not to boycott the election unless the PPP or Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) decides to do so. JI leader Qazi Hussain lobbied to have the MMA boycott the elections, but JUI-F leader Fazlur Rehman convinced the coalition to participate, according to mission contacts.  8. (C) The Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group (CMAG) suspended November 22 Pakistan's membership, but the decision will not automatically impact donor aid.  The CMAG had given Musharraf November 12 a ten-day ultimatum to step down from his post in the Army and lift the state of emergency, or risk Pakistan being suspended from the Commonwealth. The government issued a press release expressing \"deep disappointment\" over the decision and stated that it \"reflects ignorance to the ground realities.\"  9. (C) The government released prominent opposition figures this week, including Imran Khan (Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf),  ISLAMABAD 00004990  002 OF 002   Liaquat Baloch (JI), Javed Hashimi (PML-N), and Asfundyar Wali (Awami National Party), but leading lawyers and judges remain under detention (septel).  10. (U) The government of Dubai November 22 authorized ARY to resume media broadcasts.  The government of Dubai November 16 started blocking ARY and Geo broadcasts (reftel). The government said a decision is pending on whether GEO will be allowed to resume its broadcasts.  11. (C) Ambassador met separately November 19 with Benazir Bhutto and Geo TV, and Karachi CG met November 21 with ARY and the Karachi Press Club. Many political prisoners are being released throughout Sindh and Karachi. Court boycotts continue in Karachi, and police baton charged a November 20 Karachi Press Club rally protesting curbs on the media.  12. (U) A/PAO 23 November called on caretaker Minister of Information Nisar Memon. A/PAO raised USG concerns over continuing restrictions on the media, and Memon said he was confident these restrictions would be lifted soon. A/PAO also noted Embassy concerns over Pakistan TV programs that have been strongly critical of the USG, Ambassador, and Consuls General because of their public statements in favor of restoring press freedom.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4864", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/23/2007 12:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004992  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: URGING THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION TO STAY ENGAGED ON PAKISTAN  REF: ISLAMABAD 4864  ISLAMABAD 00004992  001.2 OF 002   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1.  (C) Summary and action request: Led by the European Commission, a growing number of European countries here are questioning their participation in election observer missions.  Ambassador briefed her European counterparts November 22 (septel) to urge that they not take pre-emptive decisions that will limit the international community's ability to continue encouraging the government to return to constitutional normalcy.  Post believes that recent events have made it more, not less, important to have as many independent observers in the field as possible.  We support reprogramming funds to enhance the number of observers in the U.S. mission being organized by the International Republican Institute (IRI) and believe EU capitals should consider doing the same.  We are also concerned about the domino effect of an EC cancellation will have on other nations' observer missions.  Post requests that the Department instruct the U.S. Mission to the EU to urge that the EC stay engaged in promoting credible elections in Pakistan.  End summary.  2. (C) At a November 20 meeting of the election \"like minded\" group of counterparts from mainly EU and Commonwealth countries (reftel), European Commission DCM Balthasar Benz indicated that the EC's stance on elections has hardened.  He said that the Commissioner has suspended plans to send an EC election observer mission because of concern that the January 8 elections were to be held under a state of emergency.  Benz added that the observer mission would likely be canceled if the state of emergency were not lifted sufficiently early in the campaign to allow for a free and fair election day.  Benz proposed November 26 as a possible deadline because it is the last day Pakistan's Election Commission will accept candidates' nominations.  (Note:  The EC planned to send 15 long-term and approximately 150 short-term observers to monitor Pakistan's election.  This is the largest independent observer mission planned.)  3. (C) At this news, Canada, Switzerland and Norway representatives responded that their small bilateral observer missions may be canceled because they were to be coordinated under the EC's umbrella.  Privately, other countries, including Japan, are wondering in light of the EC decision if they should proceed with organizing their own bilateral observation missions. The Commonwealth's decision to suspend Pakistan also puts its observer mission in doubt.  4. (C) The USG has repeatedly told the government that the elections will not be credible if they are held under a state of emergency and have demanded that political detainees be released and media curbs lifted so that campaigning can proceed.  The government has taken some steps in the right direction, including lifting the block on transmission of most television stations and releasing a significant number of detainees.  The Supreme Court ruled November 22 to confirm Musharraf's re-election; therefore, he could resign as Chief of Army Staff and re-take the presidential oath of office as a civilian as early as this weekend.  The Pakistan People's Party has begun to file candidate papers, making it less likely that it or other parties will boycott the elections.  5.  (C)  Thus, events may be moving slowly in the right direction, and it is presumptuous and short-sighted to pre-emptively withdraw international support for Pakistan's elections.  Post believes that it is more, not less, important to have the maximum number of international observers on the ground on election day, and we are working to increase the number of U.S. observers in the DRL-funded IRI mission.  We believe that EU capitals should support this and all efforts to make Pakistan's elections as credible as possible.  6.  (C)  Action request:  Ambassador briefed her EU  ISLAMABAD 00004992  002.2 OF 002   counterparts November 22 to urge that they remain engaged in democracy promotion by continuing to support election monitoring.  Post requests the Department to instruct the U.S. Mission to the EU to send the same message.  The EC should not suspend or cancel its election observation mission and should continue to press the government to lift the state of emergency so that credible elections can be held in January.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07PESHAWAR748", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/23/2007 14:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 004993  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, MOPS, PREF, UNHCR, EAID, PK SUBJECT: NWFP REQUESTS HELP TO SET UP IDP CAMPS  REF: PESHAWAR 748  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) authorities have asked UNHCR and the Pakistan Red Crescent Society (PRCS) for assistance in setting up IDP camps for residents fleeing the violence in Swat.  The central government has yet to approve the request.  Two potential sites have been identified for the camps, although potential numbers are still unknown.  At this point, we have no clarity on the number of potentially displaced persons or the duration they might need shelter. END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) UNHCR Islamabad confirmed that NWFP Home Secretary Badshah Gul Wazir requested help from UNHCR and the Pakistan Red Crescent Society (PRCS) to establish IDP camps for people trying to escape the violence between militant extremists and the Pakistani military in Swat.  However, General Farooq of Pakistan's National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) has yet to agree, so UNHCR cannot proceed.  (Note:  The same disconnect between the central and provincial levels was also a problem during the early stages of the flood relief efforts this past summer. End Note.)  UNHCR said they will do what they can to urge movement on this but emphasized the real pressure on General Farooq and the NDMA must come from the governor and other authorities in NWFP.  3.  (C) The plan would be to set up two camps.  One site is the Meera camp outside Shangla, the neighboring district directly to the southeast of Swat.  There was a large IDP camp there following the October 2005 earthquake and the basic elements apparently are still in place.  The second proposed site is the Benazir sports complex in Risalpur in Nowshera District, just east of Peshawar District and two districts south of Swat.  About a ten minute drive from the highway, the complex is surrounded by a ten foot wall that makes it relatively safe and easy to guard.  It can accommodate about 100 families, with space to set up some 500 tents if necessary.  Total capacity is estimated at 2,000 to 3,000 persons, plus ample covered space for storage.  The five buildings in the center were intended originally as a hospital and have roofs and rooms, but the doors and windows are open and the washrooms lack furnishings.  Existing boreholes require renovation and pump fittings for water; electricity must be supplied.  UNHCR would focus initially on furnishing the buildings to make them functional; they have 8,000 tents, 35,000 plastic sheets, and a trained local emergency team on stand-by.  The PCRS has made arrangements for 300-400 extended family packages, including tents, plastic sheeting, and other non-food items.  The Nowshera Health Department would set up a basic health unit on site.  4.  (C) At this time UNHCR has little sense of numbers, other than an initial suggestion of about 300 families (roughly 2,000 people).  Some families who are fleeing are finding refuge with relatives.  It is also unclear how long the IDP camps might be needed.  UNHCR confirmed the presence of 3,700 registered Afghans in the Swat valley, but none have come forward to date for assistance and the request to assist with IDPs is currently not an Afghan issue.  5.  (C)  COMMENT.  In spite of UNHCR and PRCS readiness, it is unclear if and when the central government will act on this situation, and it is possible that Islamabad will not support NWFP's request.  We are in close contact with UNHCR and will update potential numbers and GOP permission to act as soon as more information is available. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/23/2007 15:32", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004994  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: SLOW PROGRESS ON RESTORING POLITICAL RIGHTS  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The government of Pakistan is making slow progress on restoring political rights under the still enforced state of emergency.  The GOP's apparent \"catch and release\" policy and the bureaucratic lag between national release announcements and actual action at the local level make it particularly difficult to track accurately actual numbers of detainees.  It appears that several thousand opposition political party activists have been released, including key party leaders, but others continue to be arrested for participating in demonstrations that are illegal under the state of emergency.  Most lawyers have been released, but leaders like Aitzaz Ahsan and Munir Malik remain in jail.  Post has met with Ahsan's wife, who now sees her husband regularly; the government has yet to allow access to Malik.  The government has restored access to all private TV channels except Geo; journalists continue to protest media restrictions and continue to be arrested for their participation in anti-government rallies.  Key human rights activists like Asma Jehangir have been released.  The former Chief Justice and his court remain under house arrest. President Musharraf on November 21 signed an order that amends the constitution to legalize actions he has taken under the state of emergency (septel); this may be the prerequisite for lifting the emergency and restoring additional political rights.  End summary.   ANNOUNCEMENT OF RELEASES ------------------------  2. (U) Officials at the Ministry of Interior (MOI) announced on November 21 that they planned to release large numbers of opposition supporters, giving the power and responsibility of the releases to the newly-installed caretaker provincial leaders.  On this same day, MOI spokesman Javed Iqbal Cheema said in press statements that 3,400 people had been released with 2,000 more expected to be released.  Consulate reports indicate that while releases are occurring, a number of simultaneous arrests are also taking place.  Many detainees are being asked to sign an \"undertaking\" which stipulates that the signatory would not take part in any illegal activity in the future, specifically rallies and demonstrations.   Political Party Leaders/Workers -------------------------------  3. (U)  Since the imposition of a state of emergency, the parties targeted for arrest have shifted.  Initially, the GOP concentrated on the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, and the religious and nationalist parties.  After Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto announced plans for anti-government rallies, the focus switched to the PPP. However, under the most recent MOI announcement, leaders and workers from all parties have seen some of their brethren released, including a large number of PPP members in Karachi.  Bhutto was placed under house arrest in Islamabad hours before she was to lead an anti-government rally in Rawalpindi on November 9 and then again on November 12 before she was to lead her party on the \"Long March\" from Lahore to Islamabad. Two days into his hunger strike, Imran Khan, former cricket star and leader of the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI), was released on November 21 after being arrested a week prior at Punjab University where he was to lead an anti-government rally.   The acting president of Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz (PML-N), Javed Hashimi, was also released on November 21 from Mianwali jail.  The Vice-President for Jamaat-i Islami (JI), Liaqat Baloch, and Awami National Party (ANP) leader, Asfundyar Wali, were also released on November 22. Despite the number of high-profile releases, many political activists from each of the opposing parties remain behind bars.   Lawyers -------  4. (C)  The lawyers' associations continue to be in the  ISLAMABAD 00004994  002 OF 003   vanguard of protesters, and many who are not protesting are boycotting the courts.  On November 10, the GOP released approximately 350 Lahore lawyers detained after a massive lawyer's protest on November 5.  Another 42 lawyers were released in Lahore after the MOI announcement with the promise of many more releases to come.  Many others remain in detention despite assertions that they have been released. The presidents of the most of the country's bar associations remain imprisoned, including Baz Mohammad Kaker of the Balochistan Bar Association, and Hadi Shakeel of the High Court Bar Association.  5. (C) Former president of the Pakistan's Supreme Court Bar Association, Munir Malik, was arrested shortly after the proclamation of emergency for taking part in a talkshow on ARY TV in Islamabad.  He was moved from a jail in Rawalpindi to more distant and allegedly tougher district jail in Attock, near the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), and the MOI continues to deny his wife's requests for visitation.  On November 17 and 21, PolOff met Bushra Aitzaz, the wife of Pakistan's Supreme Court Bar Association president Aitzaz Ahsan.  Ahsan has been detained at Adiala Prison (Rawalpindi) under a \"Maintenance of Public Order\" order since the start of the emergency.  Bushra reports that she now able to meet with her husband regularly and that he is doing well.  Journalists -----------  6. (U) Although the majority of the television and radio stations have been restored, journalists continue to protest the state of emergency, the government's new media code of conduct and the continued ban on Geo TV transmissions.  On November 21, approximately 160 journalists, including one American citizen with DAWN News, were arrested at the Karachi Press Club and then released later that evening after they participated in a peaceful protest against the government-imposed curbs on the media. Ambassador visited the Geo studios in Karachi November 19 to make a public statement protesting the continued ban on Geo broadcasts.   Human Rights Advocates ----------------------  7. (U) Although the GOP claimed that the arrests were necessary in order to stop the spread of terrorist activities, human rights activists also found themselves facing similar fates.  The HRCP Chairman Asma Jehangir was placed under house arrest in Lahore on the evening of the emergency proclamation along with several other HRCP members and Irfan Barkat with the National Commission for Justice and Peace.  Despite the international outcry against the detention of these advocates, Asma and many others were not released until the MOI announcement.   Judges ------  8. (U) According to the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), approximately twenty of Pakistan's judges have been arrested or placed under house arrest since the November 3 proclamation of a state of emergency. The Pakistan Supreme Court Justices, including former Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, were placed under house arrest. Local media reported that the GOP was allowing the justices freedom of movement, but when this theory was tested by several of Chaudhry's supporters after the November 21 prisoner-release announcement, they were denied entry by the police that continue to block the judicial enclave.  Many of the arrests were the result of judges at both the national and provincial levels refusing to take the oath under the PCO, especially many of those from the High Sindh Court.  9. (C) Comment.  The GOP restored access to many media channels during the Deputy Secretary's visit and announced the mass release of detainees shortly thereafter.  The government is clearly getting the message about the damage of continued human rights violations, and is slowly restoring civil liberties.  But the GOP's \"catch and release\" policy  ISLAMABAD 00004994  003 OF 003   indicates it will continue to use arrests to stifle dissent and participation in anti-government rallies.   End Comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4992", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/23/2007 16:21", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004995  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: MEETING WITH EU AMBASSADORS  REF: ISLAMABAD 4992  ISLAMABAD 00004995  001.6 OF 002   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Ambassador met with several EU ambassadors November 22 to brief them on the Deputy Secretary's recent visit and encourage their nations' continued support for election observer missions.  See reftel requesting demarche in Brussels.  The group agreed on goals of: (1) on-time elections; (2) Musharraf's resignation as Chief of Army Staff before taking the presidential oath of office; and (3) lifting of the state of emergency as soon as possible.  End summary.  2. (C) The Ambassador met November 22 with her counterparts from Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and the U.K., as well as the charge d'affaires from Germany.  Spanish Ambassador Jose Maria Robles-Fraga requested the meeting in light of the Deputy Secretary's November 16-18 visit and subsequent meetings with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto by the Ambassador and British High Commissioner Robert Brinkley.  3. (C) Ambassador briefed on the Deputy Secretary's message that the U.S. did not believe credible elections could be held under a state of emergency and that detainees should be released and media restrictions lifted.  Portuguese Ambassador Antonio Jose da Camara Ramalho Ortigao asked why the USG was not insisting on the reinstatement of the judiciary.  Ambassador, with some concurrence in the group, noted that reinstatement of the justices, particularly of former Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, would be rejected by President Musharraf and that it would seriously detract from free elections and getting the state of emergency lifted. French Ambassador Regis de Belenet cautioned that Chaudhry's character had been called into question, including by Human Rights Commission of Pakistan leader Asma Jahangir.  British High Commissioner Brinkley added: \"We should not waste our efforts trying to restore the judiciary.\"  4. (C) The Ambassador used this meeting to urge the EU countries to avoid \"pre-emptive withdrawal\" from elections monitoring and pro-democracy initiatives.  She noted that the European Commission appeared to be threatening to cancel its observer mission to Pakistan's January 8 parliamentary elections before the country's political parties had decided whether to participate (reftel).  Brinkley said that during his November 21 meeting, Bhutto said she was still undecided on a boycott.  Bhutto told Brinkley that only nine of her 27 Central Executive Committee members were supporting an election boycott, though she would make the final decision. For now, Bhutto was leaving her options open and her demands purposely hazy.  5. (C) Concerning the eventual return of the other former prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, Brinkley said that the EU had called for a \"level playing field\" for all political parties and leaders, \"which includes Nawaz.\"  Rumors of Sharif's imminent return was \"just a hope\" by Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz supporters, he believed, but so far there did not appear to be any concrete decision by Nawaz Sharif.  6. (C) Several of the ambassadors -- from the Netherlands, France, Portugal -- asked variations of the same rhetorical question: \"How is it possible to send observers to an election under a state of emergency?\"  The Ambassador reiterated that such a decision could be made in the future, but, for now, the EC and bilateral missions should be encouraged to send more election experts, not fewer or none. The ambassadors agreed that, while Musharraf probably did not want international observers, he had publicly welcomed them and would now have to accommodate their requests for access and transparency even more than before.  7. (C) The Ambassador stressed the areas of international consensus: (1) on-time elections; (2) Musharraf's resignation as Chief of Army Staff before taking the presidential oath of office; and (3) lifting of the state of emergency as soon as possible.  The Spanish ambassador agreed that reinstatement of former Chief Justice Chaudhry should not be the EC's priority, but pushing for the release of lawyers, human rights activists and political party workers should be.  He  ISLAMABAD 00004995  002.2 OF 002   then noted that there was talk of the lawyers' movement transforming itself into a political party in order to contest the parliamentary elections.  8. (C) Brinkley said that several detainees had been released by the GOP since the beginning of the week.  He stated that several could claim to have been man-handled during their arrests, but that there had been no reports of mistreatment of these detainees while under arrest.  Often, as with the recent case of Karachi journalists, they had provoked police reaction.  9. (C) As he had in previous conversations with the Ambassador, Dutch envoy Cornelis Wilhelmus Andreae asked: \"Is Musharraf still the right man to fight terrorism?\"  British High Commissioner Brinkley noted that there had not been a suicide bombing in Pakistan since November 3.  Spanish Ambassador Robles-Fraga added that a recent article in a jihadi newspaper had called for support in the Swat region, and several would-be suicide bombers had heeded the call, according to his sources.  10. (C) Lastly, most ambassadors noted that, like it or not, they had already received instructions from their respective capitals to attend Musharraf's swearing-in ceremony as the civilian president.  11. (C) Comment: Reftel asks the Department to instruct the U.S. Mission to the EU to urge the EC against canceling its planned observer mission prematurely.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4994", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/25/2007 12:30", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 004997  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PHUM SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH PML-N'S JAVED HASHMI  REF: ISLAMABAD 4994  ISLAMABAD 00004997  001.3 OF 002   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: In-country president of opposition Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) Javed Hashmi met with the Ambassador November 24, soon after his release from prison. He appreciated USG concern during his most recent ordeal but urged us to do more to lift the state of emergency and get the judiciary reinstated.  Hashmi was energized by the anticipated November 25 return to Lahore of party leader Nawaz Sharif.  Though he predicted widespread electoral fraud, Hashmi felt that, with Nawaz back, his party could compete well.  Discussion of a boycott among opposition parties continues and has received front page coverage today (November 25).  But Hashmi had the draft list of PML-N candidates, including his daughter, which he showed the Ambassador.  Hashmi indicated that Pakistan's opposition parties had increasing contact and would be more and more likely to coordinate their actions against Musharraf.  End summary.  Out of Jail -----------  2. (C) The Ambassador met November 24 with Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz in-country party president Javed Hashmi.  He had been detained soon after the November 3 imposition of emergency and was released from prison on November 22. Hashmi thanked the Ambassador for her call and for the public statements of concern on his behalf by the State Department and USG generally.  He noted that many lawyers, human rights activists and politicians had been recently released, but highlighted that leaders of the lawyers' movement -- Aitzaz Ahsan, Ali Ahmad Kurd and Munir Malik -- were still being held.  Nawaz To Return ---------------  3. (C) Hashmi confirmed that PML-N leader Nawaz Sharif would return to Lahore from Saudi Arabia November 25.  He and the rest of PML-N candidates would likely file their nomination papers by the November 26 deadline set by the Election Commission.  However, he added that, for now, the party was still selecting/approving candidates, and Nawaz would decide at the last minute whether these candidates would submit their papers.  4. (C) Hashmi asserted that Nawaz would be able to run for a National Assembly seat, though for now, he was constitutionally barred from a third term as prime minister.  5. (C) Note: Because Sharif was convicted of \"hijacking\" Musharraf's 1999 PIA flight, Sharif should be constitutionally disqualified from being elected to the National Assembly.  However, Shahbaz Sharif, Nawaz' brother and overall party president, said November 24 from London, \"If Benazir, who too is a convict, could file the nomination, why cannot Nawaz?\"  Embassy is uncertain about Nawaz Sharif's eligibility to run for parliament.  Former prime minister Shaukat Aziz told Ambassador November 25 that Nawaz was eligible to run because he had been pardoned, although \"some lawyers disagreed\" with this assessment, Aziz added.  The Attorney General told PolCouns weeks ago that Nawaz had not been pardoned and was not eligible because he was still a convicted felon.  Obviously, Embassy will seek to clarify this point as soon as possible.  End note.  Elections: \"A Mockery\" ----------------------  6. (C) Hashmi questioned how the international community, namely the USG, could expect the January 8 general elections to be free and fair if held under a state of emergency, and requested a stronger USG stance.  He predicted that PML-N candidates would be kept from campaigning how, when and where they pleased.  Hashmi criticized curbs on the media.  This situation is \"a mockery,\" he said.  Hashmi added that the PML-N would demand the restoration of the judiciary and that Nawaz Sharif would never accept Musharraf as president, in or  ISLAMABAD 00004997  002 OF 002   out of uniform.  7. (C) The Ambassador reiterated the USG commitment to lifting the state of emergency as soon as possible.  She noted that The Asia Foundation (TAF) was providing 20,000 domestic observers, partially funded by the USG, and that the Embassy would send out an increased number of international observation units.  She said Embassy had identified 84 historically \"hotly contested\" districts, and the PML-N leader was welcome to share his party's own \"watch list\" of districts that may have a higher incidence of electoral/voter fraud.  Hashmi responded positively and committed to appointing a campaign POC.  8. (C) Hashmi claimed that he was unaware of any conditions to which Nawaz had to agree before returning to Pakistan. Nawaz would not \"deal\" with Musharraf, Hashmi added, even rebuffing a Saudi attempt to have the two men meet while Musharraf was in the kingdom earlier this week.  In fact, Hashmi claimed that Saudi authorities informed Nawaz a month ago that he was free to go.  They then requested him to stay a bit longer until issues surrounding the November 3 imposition of emergency were more settled.  9. (C) Hashmi (similar to other PML-N contacts) appeared energized by the imminent return of Nawaz: \"Once he is here, it will be difficult for the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML) to fetch votes in the Punjab.\"  He further predicted that the PML would start to disintegrate, adding: \"It is just an arrangement not a political party.\"  An Opposition United? ---------------------  10. (C) Hashmi said that, even in prison, he had stayed in touch with other opposition leaders, talking twice with People's Party's (PPP) Benazir Bhutto, as well as with Jamaat-e-Islami's (JI) Qazi Hussain and Tehreek-e-Insaf's Imran Khan.  He had not been in touch with Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam's (JUI-F) Fazlur Rehman.  Hashmi argued that Rehman was not behind the increasing violence in the frontier area of Swat.  Instead, Rehman was a practical politician who should be brought to the U.S.  \"These people need to see your country,\" Hashmi recommended.  Even though the U.S. gave these religious parties an issue by aligning with Musharraf, Pakistan's mass secularism would ensure that \"not a single mullah would win in the Punjab,\" Hashmi asserted.  11. (C) Comment: Contrary to November 25 press reports that opposition parties, including PML-N, intend to boycott the January 8 general elections, this November 24 conversation indicates that the PML-N continues planning to contest elections, particularly in the Punjab.  Nomination papers are not due until November 26, and candidates may withdraw up to December 15, so the PML-N can keep its options open. Conflicting news stories are expected since this is still an election campaign, even if under a state of emergency.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4996", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/25/2007 15:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 004998  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: IMPACT OF NAWAZ SHARIF'S RETURN  REF: ISLAMABAD 4996 (NOTAL)  ISLAMABAD 00004998  001.2 OF 003   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR  ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE MESSAGE  WILL BE REISSUED UNDER NEW MRN  ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR    ISLAMABAD 00004998  002.3 OF 003   ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR  ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE MESSAGE  WILL BE REISSUED WITH NEW MRN  ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR   ISLAMABAD 00004998  003.4 OF 003   ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR  ZFR (CANCEL) ENTIRE MESSAGE  WILL BE REISSUED WITH NEW MRN  ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR ZFR   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/26/2007 12:34", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005017  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, ECON, ETRD, EFIN, EINV, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: AMERICAN BUSINESSES EXPRESS VIEWS ON STATE OF EMERGENCY  1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Ambassador spoke November 20 at the Islamabad monthly American business breakfast meeting to share U.S. views the political and economic situation and to gauge business reaction to the state of emergency.  Opinions diverged among the executives on the current state of affairs and the future of investment activity. Some U.S. companies are proceeding with expansion plans.  Most expressed a desire for communication and support from the Embassy, particularly regarding the travel advisory.  END SUMMARY.  2. (SBU) The Ambassador spoke for the first time November 20 at the Embassy-organized breakfast for the American companies located in Islamabad.  Eighteen companies attended.  The Ambassador shared the U.S. perspective on the current situation in Pakistan and solicited attendees' views.  Considerable debate erupted among the audience, which one attendee stated reflects the divided views throughout Pakistani society.  3. (SBU) Several executives worried that Pakistan is headed down the wrong path.  Farrukh Aslam, CEO Touchstone (a founder and American citizen who currently resides in Ft. Worth, Texas) said most Pakistani-Americans believe that Musharraf has the blessing of the U.S. government to impose the state of emergency because the U.S. has supported him for the last eight years. (Note: Aslam has spent 24 years living in the U.S. and visits Pakistan several times a year.  End Note)  Musharraf's administration, he said, has \"failed to deliver\" in the crackdown on terrorism, demonstrated by recent events such as the Red Mosque and Swat.  Articles like the recent Newsweek edition titled \"Iraq is Not the Most Dangerous Country in the World, It's Pakistan\" seriously harmed public opinion, which, as Zahid Mirza of Netsol Technologies commented, has caused alarm among its global customer base.  4. (SBU) Irfan Qureshi, Country Manager of Chevron (CalTex) expressed concern over the U.S. support for Benazir Bhutto given her corrupt past.  He described threats of arrest against him by Bhutto's husband and worries that her return will bring back the large scale corruption that harmed many companies' growth and Pakistan's international reputation.  5. (SBU) On the other hand, several executives said the international media has blown the current situation out of proportion.  Khurram Rahat, Managing Director of Teredata, said Pakistan is still a top 20 revenue generating country for his American company.  There is a misperception, he said, that what is happening in Swat also occurs in Islamabad, and he has worked internally at Teredata to correct this view.  Malik Imran, Government Account Manager of Microsoft, said the company is looking to expand its workforce by 40% over the next year.  He personally visited areas of the NWFP regularly over the last year and did not see widespread chaos.  In discussions with his Seattle headquarters, Imran tells senior executives that the situation in Pakistan is not as problematic as it appears in the media.  Rahat and several members asked the Ambassador to look at developing an Embassy message that the companies can send back to their American headquarters saying the situation is not as dire as the media portrays.  The Ambassador offered companies with concerns to contact the Embassy individually for reassurance.  6. (SBU) Despite the current situation, a number of companies are proceeding with investment activities and hosting U.S. visitors. Aslam plans to go ahead with a $1 billion power plant project in connection with ALCOA and currently employs 1,100 people in his three existing businesses in Pakistan, including Touchstone. Visiting Uch U.S. executive Mark Molacek was not overly concerned about his trip to Pakistan.  He is working with Uch Power in Baluchistan to double the capacity of their existing power plant, worth an estimated $500 million.  Teradata plans to have three executives from the U.S. visit in the next month, including two Vice Presidents and the Chief Technology Officer.  7. (SBU) COMMENT:  There are many diverse opinions about the current and future situation in Pakistan. One common thread is that it would be better to end the state of emergency as soon as possible, hold elections, and then move on.  All American company executives would like to overcome the negative public opinion from their headquarters and customers.  The potential growth, through investment, employment, and expansion plans, is enormous given the momentum of the past five years of seven percent growth and record levels of portfolio and direct investment.  However, the potential to for continued expansion of the U.S. business community and Pakistan's economic growth will be greater if the state of emergency is not prolonged and January elections are credible.  END COMMENT.   ISLAMABAD 00005017  002 OF 002    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4994", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/26/2007 13:08", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005018  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: UPDATE ON ATTORNEYS AHSAN AND MALIK  REF: ISLAMABAD 4994  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U)  Summary.  Both the current and former Pakistan Supreme Court Bar Association Presidents have been released from jail.  Aitzaz Ahsan has been transferred to house arrest in Lahore where he was allowed to file his election nomination papers.  Munir Malik was transferred to the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences and released from detention; he is undergoing dialysis for a chronic liver disease and gave a TV interview from his hospital bedside. End Summary.  AITZAZ AHSAN ------------  2. (U) On November 25, Aitzaz Ahsan, the Pakistan Supreme Court Bar Association president, was escorted by police to the sessions court in Lahore to file his nomination for a National Assembly seat for the January 8 elections.  This registration was conducted after the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader was moved from the Adiala jail in Rawalpindi, where he had been held since the proclamation of emergency, to his home in Zaman Park (Lahore), dubbed by authorities as a \"sub-jail.\"  While he and four other PPP members submitted their papers, reportedly large numbers of lawyers expressed support for Aitzaz and chanted anti-government slogans. (Note: This is a case of particular interest to Senator Conrad.)  MUNIR MALIK -----------  3. (C)  On November 24, former Supreme Court Bar Association president Munir Malik was moved from an Attock district jail to the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) for treatment for chronic liver disease.  The GOP reportedly has now released him from detention status.  His relatives were denied visitation rights to the jail by the Ministry of Interior, and there has been press speculation that he was tortured.  (Note: In repeated meetings with Emboffs over the past few months, Malik was intoxicated, even in his Supreme Court office.  While this does not negate any allegations of torture, it does give credence to the government's claim that Malik is suffering from chronic liver disease.)  From his hospital bed November 25, Malik gave an interview on Dawn TV criticizing the government.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4601", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/26/2007 13:15", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005019  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, MASS, SNAR, PK SUBJECT: FATA IMPLEMENTATION PLAN UPDATE (11/26/07)  REF:  ISLAMABAD 4601  1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: Construction crews broke ground for the Border Coordination Center (BCC) at Torkham November 17. Design teams working on the Frontier Corps Training Center (FCTC) at Warsak will return within the week to refine construction timelines. The UK may proceed (ahead of the US) with efforts under the Security Development Plan for western Pakistan to improve Frontier Corps capabilities in Baluchistan. USAID's Office of Transition Initiatives (OTI) is ramping up its FATA program, with Implementing Partners based in Peshawar set to begin work in December. The FATA Secretariat has expressed interest in upgrading a British era  SIPDIS highway in South Waziristan. NAS has assisted in improving radio communication between the FATA Secretariat and project offices. And, the FATA Construction Unit is expected to be operational in early 2008.  Also, note the ambassador's proposal for an OIG audit review of FATA programs (para 2).  END SUMMARY.  FATA Programmatic Audit Proposal -------------------------------- 2.  (SBU) In light of the scope and complexity of FATA development programs, the Ambassador would like to initiate an open contract through the Office of the Inspector General to conduct periodic financial audits, in accordance with a request from the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. This audit would review the program's contracts, inventories, and overall spending to ensure the highest levels of transparency and accountability. FATA Coordinator will be in direct contact with OIG to discuss this.  ODRP:  Progress on the Torkham BCC ---------------------------------- 3.  (SBU) Construction began at the Torkham Border Coordination Center, with ground-breaking on November 17. Work continues with perimeter wall installation, excavation of a site for cement building pads, and digging of an 80 meter well. The contractor has submitted required drawings to DOD-CN to get official notice to proceed on the building pads. ODRP continues to monitor progress to ensure coordination between building contractors and those hired to construct the center's communications installation. CJTF-82 has issued invitations through Coalition LNOs for an implementation meeting on November 30; while that date may slip, we hope at least to have more detail on participants/action officers for future coordination meetings.  Frontier Corps Training Center ------------------------------ 4. (SBU) Contractor for the FCTC at Warsak intends to return with a design team within the week to refine project design and firm up the timeline. The facility, to be built with 2007 supplemental funding, includes classrooms for 450 students, quarters for 100 Pakistani instructors, barracks, a 300-person mess hall and a headquarters office. ODRP is working with the contractors to identify ways to cut costs so that we can construct billets for Coalition instructors.  5. (SBU) The first shipment of vehicles and equipment at the FCTC is expected in mid-January 2008 and will include body armor/helmets for 1050 troops, 540 combat lifesaver kits, nine ambulances, 60 Hilux vehicles, 30 two and a half ton troop carriers, four water trucks and 20 motorcycles. 28 Forward Looking Infrared Radar (FLIR), on a six-month production timeline, are expected to arrive in Pakistan shortly thereafter.  United Kingdom Support ---------------------- 6. (SBU) UK lead for the western Pakistan Security Development Plan (SDP) informed ODRP on November 26 that he intends to recommend the UK begin planning for SDP Phase II, the effort to improve Frontier Corps Baluchistan capabilities. The UK is concerned that the delays the US had had gaining formal approval of the SDP will jeopardize their ability to improve the security situation in Baluchistan adjacent to their Area of Operation on the Afghan side. Their intent is to finalize planning and solicit resources for development of a training center that will include infrastructure development and course development support.  OTI Update ---------- 7. (SBU) USAID's Office of Transition Initiatives is ramping up its program. Creative Associates International and the International Office of Migration (IOM) have been selected as OTI's implementing partners. Pending final negotiations, the OTI Country Representative will begin work in Peshawar in December. Partners and OTI staff  ISLAMABAD 00005019  002 OF 002   participated in a two-day kick off session in Washington. OTI staffing in-country is being finalized and an office is being set up in Peshawar, housed with USAID/Pakistan at the Consulate. Following lessons identified on previous OTI startups, OTI is maintaining a continuous TDY presence on the ground until permanent staff arrives.   South Waziristan Security and Road Building ------------------------------------------- 8. (SBU) \"Quiet, but not secure\" describes current conditions throughout much of South Waziristan, the scene of fierce fighting between government forces and militants earlier this year. During our November 21 meetings at the FATA Secretariat, officials pointed to signs of a somewhat more permissive environment and suggested consideration of a road-building project in the agency. Their proposal floated to NAS involved reconstruction of a British era highway running from the eastern agency boundary into the South Waziristan heartland. Separately, NAS Director held frank discussions with Pakistani Corps of Engineers officers to review a lack of progress and accountability on a NAS-funded FATA road-building project.  Capacity Building ----------------- 9. (SBU) A final meeting (November 27) will open the way for the FATA Construction Unit to be operational in the next 2-3 months. In November, NAS also established improved radio communication between FATA Secretariat offices and project offices in each of the seven Political Agencies and is training FATA technicians in radio repair.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/27/2007 4:19", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005022  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN CENTRAL BANK PROJECTS STRONG ECONOMIC GROWTH IN FY08   Summary -------  1. (SBU) The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) released its annual report on the state of Pakistan's economy in October 2007 prior to the imposition of the November 3 state of emergency. The State Bank was pleased with the seven percent GDP growth rate in FY2007, particularly given the increase in international oil prices and gradual tightening of monetary policy.  The SBP projects that Pakistan's economy will continue to grow strongly in FY08, driven by robust growth in the agriculture and services sectors. The State Bank plans to continue its tight monetary policy, which should contain the demand pressures and check any rapid rise in inflation. Containing inflation, however, may prove difficult because of high international food and fuel prices. While the total stock of debt and liabilities rose, the ratio of total debt and liabilities to GDP continued to decline, one indicator of Pakistan's improved debt servicing potential.   Pakistan, however, is likely to face higher debt servicing burden in the future since repayments of the rescheduled non-ODA Paris club debt stock will resume in FY08 and the Euro and Sukuk bonds will mature in FY 2009 and FY 2010 respectively.  End summary.  SBP Projects Strong Economic Growth in FY08 -------------------------------------------  2.  (SBU) The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) projects that the economy will continue to experience strong, broad-based growth in FY08, particularly in agriculture and services.  Continuation of tight monetary policy should help contain demand pressure in the economy, and keep domestic inflation close to the annual target of 6.5 percent in FY08.  Key inflation risks are rising international energy prices and the high food commodity prices.  The domestic economy was partially insulated from higher international energy prices during FY2007 due to the government's decision not to pass on to customers the increase in the prices of key fuels.   This policy will be difficult to sustain if energy prices continue to increase further.  Domestic prices for key food staples have already been affected by rising international prices, and domestic food prices will increase further in FY2008 if harvests are below expectations. The SBP expects the current account deficit to be larger than the FY2007 figure in absolute terms.  However, the deficit is expected to fall as a share of GDP.  A further decline in import growth, together with a small improvement in export growth, and a robust rise in remittances underpins the projected improvement in the current account deficit in FY08.  (Comment:  Remittances rose 41.5 percent in October 2007, compared to the previous year.  End comment.)  SBP Lauds Investment Led Growth in FY2007 -----------------------------------------  3.  (SBU) Pakistan's economy recorded one of the fastest growth rates in Asia during FY2007. Real GDP grew 7.0 percent -- surpassed only by China and India. This was the third consecutive year in which growth was supported by rapid rise in real investment. According to the SBP, sound macroeconomic policies have successfully transformed the initial consumption-led growth impetus of a few years back to a greater role for sustainable investment-led growth. With the investment to GDP ratio at a record 23 percent, complemented by a surge in domestic private investment and record FDI flows, the economy looks well-poised to continue on a high growth trajectory in coming years.  (Comment:  While investment rates are at an all-time high for Pakistan, they are still low compared to China and India.  End comment.)  4.  (SBU) Several key macroeconomic indicators showed substantial improvement in FY2007 compared to FY2006.  The national savings percentage of GDP rose from 17.2 percent to 18 percent; the external debt burden declined from 59 percent of GDP to 56.8 percent; and tax revenue increased from 9.5 percent to 9.6 percent of GDP, while the budget deficit stayed at last year's level of 4.3 percent of GDP. The SPB hopes that the improvements in these indicators will lead to increased growth in the coming years.  5.  (SBU) However, Pakistan still needs to make progress on a number of indicators to ensure sustained economic growth.  The current account deficit widened in FY2007; the tax to GDP ratio is still very low at 9.6 percent; and inflation remained stubbornly high at 7.8 percent, showing only a small decline from FY2006.  The decline in non-food inflation during FY2006 shows that monetary policy was  ISLAMABAD 00005022  002 OF 003   effective in containing demand-related inflationary pressures. The impact of the monetary tightening was somewhat overshadowed the higher than anticipated food inflation, which was 10.3 percent in FY2006.  Increasing international prices for basic food commodities and failure of domestic crops due to untimely rains contributed to high food inflation.  Quake and infrastructure expenditures increase fiscal deficit --------------------------------------------- --------  6. (SBU) The fiscal deficit rose to 4.3 percent of GDP, well within range of the 4.2 percent target, despite increases in direct tax collections and non-tax revenues in FY2006.   The higher fiscal deficits in FY2006 and FY2007 are mainly attributed to increased spending relief and rehabilitation of the earthquake affected areas.  Strong growth in current expenditures also contributed to the rise in the deficit. The GOP's expansionary fiscal policy poses a dilemma.  On the one hand, the high fiscal deficit in recent years is driven primarily by development spending, particularly on infrastructure, which is necessary to sustain economic growth.  On the other hand, tax reforms have not significantly increased the tax base, even as tax revenues have increased because of sustained economic growth.  The World Bank Categorizes Pakistan as Moderately Indebted --------------------------------------------- -----  7. (SBU) The SBP report highlighted that Pakistan was classified by the World Bank's Global Development of the Finance as a moderately indebted country in 2006, along with other 38 moderately indebted countries within a group of 211 countries.  Pakistan's total stock of debt and liabilities (TDL) rose by 10 percent from FY2006 to FY2007 to reach Rs 5,023.6 billion ($82.35 billion).  The growing current account deficit and a large fiscal deficit contributed to this increase.  Despite the growth in the TDL stock, the ratio of total debt and liabilities to GDP continued to decline which shows country's improved debt servicing potential.  Pakistan has already achieved its FY2013 goal of a 60 percent DL to GDP ratio for FY2007 set out in the 2005 Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation Act.   8.  (SBU) Pakistan's domestic debt stock increased sharply in FY2007, registering a growth of 11.9 percent - much higher than the average growth of 7.7 percent during the preceding four years.  The share of short term debt continued to rise and reached 43 percent in FY2007.  The rising share of short term domestic debt means increased vulnerability to adverse short-term interest rate movements, potentially complicating future debt management. There was a sharp rise of 57.1 percent in interest payments on domestic debt in FY2007.  The maturing high-cost, zero coupon instruments (domestic saving certificates) issued in late 1990s was the major contribution to this increase.  9. (SBU) Pakistan's external debt and liabilities (EDL) rose to US$ 40.1 billion in FY2007, representing a US$2.9 billion increase over FY2006.  The rise in the EDL stock included inflows from IDA, ADB, and the issuance of a new Eurobond. Private loans also made sizeable contributions to the increase of the debt stock.  Despite this increase Pakistan's EDL to GDP ratio continued to improve.  This improvement in debt ratios led to improvements in sovereign ratings; Moody's up-graded Pakistan's foreign and local currency bond ratings to B1 from B2 in FY2007, before downgrading Pakistan following imposition of the November 3 state of emergency  10.  (SBU) Pakistan continued to move toward longer term financing in FY2007.  A significant share of the inflows received during FY2007 had a long term maturity ranging from 15 - 40 years.  The improved maturity structure of loan inflows to some extent offsets the effects of the floating interest rate structure of these loans. During FY2007, 62.5 percent of new loan inflows had floating interest rates, including a US$750 million 10-year Eurobond and a substantial portion of Asian Development Bank inflows.  A higher share of flexible rate loans might translate into increasing debt servicing burden, should these interest rates rise appreciably.  Resumption of Repayments May Stress Debt Servicing Capacity --------------------------------------------- ------  11. (SBU)  In the coming years, Pakistan is likely to face a higher debt servicing burden as repayments of the rescheduled non-Official Development Assistance Paris Club debt stock will resume in FY2008,  ISLAMABAD 00005022  003 OF 003   and the Eurobond issued in FY04 and Sukuk bonds issued in FY05 will mature and come due in FY2009 and FY2010 respectively.  In addition, interest payments on various Eurobonds issued recently are likely to add to debt servicing burden in coming years.  To maintain today's debt servicing capacity, Pakistan's foreign exchange earnings, particularly export earnings, and GDP need to grow faster.  Financial Account Registers Record Surplus ------------------------------------------  12. (SBU) As a result of a relative slowdown in the growth of the current account deficit and a record increase in investment inflows, Pakistan's external account surplus improved substantially to US$3.7 billion in FY2007, compared to US$1.3 billion in FY2006.  Moderate growth in the current account deficit is attributed mainly to a sharp fall in the growth of imports (which compensated for an unexpected decline in exports) and a strong increase in remittances (that partially offset the rise in investment income outflows).  The financial account surplus increased substantially from US$5.8 billion in FY2006 to a record US$10.1 billion in FY2007.  Increased equity flows were largely responsible for this improvement. Pakistan's overall reserves increased by US$ 2.5 billion in FY2007, compared to US$ 524 million in FY2006, one result of the substantial external account surplus.  13.  (SBU) During FY2007, the Pakistan rupee depreciated by 1.14 percent against the U.S. dollar from July 2006 - January 2007, then appreciated by 0.81% in the second half of FY2007.  In the first half of FY2007, the widening trade deficit drove the rupee depreciation while improved market related inflows helped the rupee to regain most of its lost ground later in the fiscal year.  The rupee saw a net depreciation of 0.31 percent in FY2007 against the U.S. dollar.  14.  (SBU) Net dividend and profit outflows were $537 million in FY2007, compared to $433 million in FY2006, for an increase of 24 percent. Telecoms, power, financial services and petroleum refining have recorded heavy profit and dividend outflows because of large foreign investments in these sectors in earlier years.  The telecom sector repatriated more profits and dividends, compared to reinvested earnings.  The financial services sector reinvested most of its earnings instead of repatriating them in profits and dividends.  The heavy FDI inflows in recent years are likely to result in large profit and dividend outflows in coming years unless they are reinvested, putting additional pressure on Pakistan's balance of payments.  In FY2007, more than $500 million in profits and dividends left Pakistan.  Comment -------  15.  (SBU) The robust growth in the economic activity and prudent management of country's debt has significantly improved debt servicing capacity during the past few years.  This is reflected in the fall in the ratio of country's stock of external debt and liabilities (EDL) to GDP from the 57 percent in FY01 to 28 percent in FY2007. Similarly, the ratio of EDL to export earnings also witnessed an impressive fall from the level of 416 percent in FY01 to 237 percent in FY2007, one indication of Pakistan's higher debt repayment capacity.  16.  (SBU) Notwithstanding these improvements, the sharp deterioration in country's current and fiscal account deficits during the last two years may well limit Pakistan's debt servicing capacity, especially if increases in both the current account and fiscal deficits continue.  The resumption of repayment on rescheduled debt and maturing of Euro bonds will put further pressure on Pakistan's debt servicing capacity.  The November 3 imposition of a state of emergency is likely to slow foreign investment inflows, and has already driven the rupee to a three year low against the U.S. dollar.  Foreign inflows are also likely to fall, due to the political and economic uncertainty, which would be a drag on economic growth.  Pakistan is crucially dependent on foreign inflows to support its growth in view of low domestic savings and investment rates.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4273", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/27/2007 8:18", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005037  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PTER, KISL, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES ELECTIONS WITH FAZLUR REHMAN  REF: ISLAMABAD 4273  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  Responding to an invitation, Ambassador met for lunch with Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman on November 20.  Ambassador reiterated that the USG supporting lifting the state of emergency and steps to ensure the elections are free and fair.   Rehman agreed, but he affirmed that his party would not boycott the elections. Seeking USG approval in the event he became Prime Minister, Rehman urged that Washington not crown Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto prematurely.  He had not decided if he could work with Bhutto again given her recent statements about religious leaders.  Rehman expressed concern that deteriorating security in the tribal areas and the Northwest Frontier Province could prevent elections in some districts thereby undermining his party's tally.  However, he appeared to relish his possible role as kingmaker in the upcoming elections.  On participating in the follow-on to the Peace Jirga, Rehman said he would have to first consult \"the opposition\" in Afghanistan.  Rehman was pleased to discover that the USG was willing to make a distinction between some Taliban members and al Qaeda leaders.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Ambassador and Polcouns met November 20 over lunch with Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman.  Also attending the lunch were Maulana Abdul Ghafoor Haideri, Senator Talha Mahmood, Senator Aza Swati and Malik Sikander Khan.  Rehman again spoke through an interpreter, although he clearly understood much of the English he heard.  JUI-F Will Participate in Elections -----------------------------------  3.  (C)  Ambassador opened the meeting by stating that the USG supported the lifting of the state of emergency and steps to ensure elections are free and fair.  Rehman said it was JUI-F's policy to support free and fair elections, affirmed that he had no plans to take to the streets to protest the state of emergency, and said the party would participate in elections.  (Note:  Rehman later filed his nomination papers, breaking with the Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) party, which so far continues to say it will boycott.)  4.  (C)  However, Rehman said that JUI-F was not calling for restoration of the judges.  In his opinion, the judges Musharraf replaced for refusing to take an oath of loyalty to Musharraf in 2007, were the same group had taken an oath of loyalty to Musharraf in 1999, so there wasn't much of a difference.  Relations with the PPP ----------------------  5.  (C)  Rehman said that JUI-F had greater differences with President Musharraf than Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto had with Musharraf.  PPP, he said, agreed with Musharraf on everything except how to tackle religious extremism.  He would \"have to see\" if JUI-F could ally itself with Bhutto's party.  She had been making negative statements about religious people, talked of handing AQ Khan over to the U.S. authorities, and discussed letting the USG conduct unilateral operations in Pakistan.  Rehman had spoken with Bhutto several times about possibly uniting the opposition parties against Musharraf; she had advocated establishing a neutral caretaker government, and restoring the judiciary. Rehman said he had suggested that Bhutto make these demands that could be discussed, not conditions that had to be met, and he counseled PPP against boycotting the election.  The USG Imprimatur ------------------  6.  (C)  Haideri said that all important parties in Pakistan had to get the approval of the USG.  JUI-F wanted to be a major party and therefore wanted to be more engaged with the U.S.  At one point in the conversation, Rehman asked the Ambassador if the USG would deal with him if he was elected as Prime Minister and cautioned the USG not to put all of its eggs in the basket of Benazir Bhutto.  Ambassador noted that it was not USG policy to crown any particular leader in Pakistan.  The U.S. was a practical nation that respected the  ISLAMABAD 00005037  002 OF 002   democratic process and would deal with the choice of the Pakistani people.  Rehman indicated his desire to travel to the U.S. and suggested he could lobby the Congress  and American think tanks \"as well as Benazir Bhutto.\"  Security Situation ------------------  7.  (C)  Rehman said that JUI-F was trying to pacify the situation in the Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA), but \"the people didn't always listen to them.\"  Even Rehman had received threats from militants after he met with the Ambassador (reftel) the last time.  He did not support military action against the militants and felt that excessive military operations had made the situation in the FATA and the Northwest Frontier Province worse.  He believed that the federal government had blocked implementation of some of the JUI-F program, for instance enactment of the Hasba legislation that would have imposed Sharia law, which had undermined popular support for the religious parties.  So the people lost faith in the religious parties and now were resorting to violence under the leadership of demagogues like Maulana Fazlullah in Swat.  8.  (C)  Admitting that JUI-F did not have much support in the Punjab, Rehman said that JUI-F's strength remained in the FATA, NWFP and Balochistan.  These were all crisis areas and Rehman was concerned that if elections could not take place in these areas because of security concerns, then JUI-F's prospects could be negatively affected.  Afghanistan/Jirga -----------------  9. (C)  Rehman asked if he could \"send a message\" across to the \"opposition forces\" in Afghanistan that the U.S. did not want to stay in Afghanistan for a long time.  This would pacify them a bit.  Ambassador said we did not want to stay any longer than necessary to restore security and support the government of President Karzai.  In response to Ambassador's question, Rehman said he wanted a sense of how the \"opposition forces\" would react before deciding whether to participate in a Pakistani delegation at a follow-on meeting of the Peace Jirga.  Taliban/al Qaeda ----------------  10.  (C)  Finally, Rehman said he wanted to ask \"a very difficult question\" -- did the USG make a distinction between the Taliban and al Qaeda?  He was pleasantly taken aback when Ambassador said that the USG supported President Karzai's recent initiative to reach out to some members of the Taliban who were willing to be reconciled with the Afghan government, and that we recognized that these people did not always share the same views as the leaders of al Qaeda.  11.  (C)  Comment:  Fazlur enjoys being courted by both Musharraf and Bhutto and sees himself increasingly in the lucrative position of being kingmaker, if not the next Prime Minister, because of JUI-F's voter strength in what may be a three-way vote tie among Pakistan's major parties.  Even if JUI-F's voter support drops, he has made it clear that, free and fair elections notwithstanding, his still significant number of votes are up for sale. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4864|07ISLAMABAD4947|07ISLAMABAD4992|07ISLAMABAD4995|07ISLAMABAD4998", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/28/2007 7:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005054  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PGOV, EAID, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: PLANNING FOR JANUARY 8 ELECTIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4998      B. ISLAMABAD 4995      C. ISLAMABAD 4992      D. ISLAMABAD 4947      E. ISLAMABAD 4864  1. (SBU)  Summary:  Embassy is emailing to SCA, USAID, and DRL the first cut of the Mission Pakistan election monitoring plan.   We will focus on constituencies which historically have been closely contested and/or stolen.  We are planning, particularly if the Europeans do not participate in election-monitoring, a Mission-wide monitoring program, to ensure elections are &free, fair and transparent.8  Post requests additional people and resources.   Even with more personnel, our election effort will adversely affect reporting and visitor support.  We are also consulting with IRI about an enhanced observation mission.  End summary.  2. (SBU) With the arrival of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, post believes that USG involvement in election monitoring will be more critical than ever.  While a boycott is still possible, we believe most parties are likely to participate in the elections.  Historically, losers in Pakistan have claimed (often justifiably) that elections have been stolen.   We believe the return of both Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto, combined with Musharraf's new civilian role as President, has leveled the playing field and increase the importance of voting in what may be closely contested elections.  3. (SBU) Embassy has emailed to SCA, DRL, and USAID a first draft of the Mission,s election monitoring plan.  We ask that it be widely shared among agencies.  We are also working with the IRI election mission, domestic monitoring groups, and other diplomatic missions to include their small, bilateral delegations in our effort.  USG involvement will be particularly important if (as per reftels B, C and E) the EU refuses to send observers.  A major election effort will, however, degrade the Embassy,s ability to report and to support visitors.  (Embassy is already expecting a CODEL to participate in the monitoring effort.)  In addition, we expect considerable international press which will require our attention.  Post will need funding from SCA to provide for rental cars, per diem, the cost of establishing a control center, and other expenses.  We estimate we will need $90,000 to cover TDY, overtime, travel and other expenses. Details of expected costs will be provided as election day approaches.  4. (SBU) Embassy has consulted with IRI about increasing the numbers of its observers.  To recap, IRI was already planning to have twelve long-term observers in country by this week and 43 short-term observers, to arrive 4-5 days before the election.   This initial effort is funded by DRL.  USAID has now made available additional funding ($1.4 million) to fund an increase in IRI observers.  Unlike observers from diplomatic missions, including ourselves, IRI has real expertise and can concentrate on the counting process and working with the parties to identify conflictive constituencies.  We are asking IRI to cost out a proposal to increase the number of long-term advisors from twelve to twenty-two and the short-term advisors by forty-three to sixty-three.  All would be personnel who have direct, international election experience.  5. (U) We are also contributing to the funding of domestic observers from the Asia Foundation.  The Asia Foundation is affiliated with the local Free and Fair elections network, a Pakistani NGO, which will provide 20,000 election observers for approximately 100 districts.  UNDP will play a coordinating role among NGOs and has prepared a manual for political party workers with information on the election procedures, a description of the process, and the appeals process.  6. (SBU) Post needs personnel for the election monitoring who are familiar with Pakistan.   Some individuals with previous experience are Tom West (SCA/PAB), Saba Ghori (DRL), Rozina Damanwala (DRL), Barbara Smith (USAID), Michael Hrychchyshyn (USAID), Robin McClellan (S/CT-New Delhi), Tim Wilder (SCA/Afghanistan) and Sameer Sheth (SCA/PAB).  USAID has only one TDY election officer in Pakistan.   We believe one person  ISLAMABAD 00005054  002 OF 002   is not adequate to support the process and request that USAID provide an additional person to support this effort.  7. (U) Post will continue to plan along these lines unless instructed otherwise.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4993", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/28/2007 10:34", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005060  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/26/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PTER, MOPS, PREF, UNHCR, EAID, PK SUBJECT: GOP DECLINES UNHCR HELP FOR IDPS FROM SWAT  REF: ISLAMABAD 4993  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, reasons 1.4  (b), (d)  1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Citing concern about the optics, Pakistan's National Disaster Management Authority declined to approve the Northwest Frontier Province's request for UN assistance to help displaced persons (IDPs) fleeing the violence in Swat.  NDMA claims it has sufficient tents and food, but provincial authorities are frustrated by the lack of supply.  The Pakistan Red Crescent Society is authorized to provide assistance and has begun meeting some needs; the International Committee of the Red Cross is also starting to respond.  IDP numbers are estimated to range from 40,000-60,000; we cannot confirm what seems to be a high estimate.  END SUMMARY.  2.  (C) UNHCR Deputy Representative Michael Zwack confirmed his organization was told that UNHCR assistance is not/not needed to meet the needs of thousands of people fleeing the violence in Swat.  Gen. (Retd.) Farooq of Pakistan's National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) told Zwack that \"Pakistan is not a banana republic\" and can take care of its own.  Farooq also allegedly gave the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) Special Home Secretary for Refugees and Security, Tippu Khan, a hard time for requesting UNHCR assistance.  Khan shared his frustration with UNHCR about not getting the assistance that is supposedly available.  3.  (C) Farooq told UNHCR that Pakistan produces and stocks tents, provides them to others as needed, and has food and supplies available, so he does not want any UN tents, food, or other assistance.  Zwack believes Farooq's position stems in part from his fear of adverse consequences should it become clear through UNCHR logos that Pakistan had asked for international help. However, Farooq is allowing the Pakistan Red Crescent Society, also approached by Tippu Khan, to assist IDPs.  Because the Red Crescent is local and Muslim, its optics are acceptable.  UNHCR nevertheless told Farooq and the NDMA that they are willing to help, if requested, with advice, technical assistance, supplies, water bladders, food, or whatever is needed.  4.  (C) ICRC and UNHCR contacts told Consulate Peshawar that an initial attempt, now aborted, to establish an IDP camp may be evidence that some assistance would be welcome.  The Bari Kot camp, about ten kilometers from the district capital of Saidu Sharif, reportedly will not be used after all due to water shortages and intimidation by Maulana Fazlullah, the militant Swat leader now in control of much of the area.  ICRC plans to reach out to residents in neighboring districts to offer assistance to those who have fled Swat.  A transit camp in Malakand is helping people move to the Benazir Sports Complex in Nowshera. Consulate Peshawar learned that Red Crescent is providing some assistance in that camp, but the Army appears to have the lead.  5.  (C) Zwack met again with NWFP authorities in Peshawar, who estimate that 40,000 to 60,000 Swat residents have already fled the region.  Zwack admitted it is impossible to confirm what appears to be a high estimate, but UNHCR is accepting this figure for the time being.  ICRC has an assessment team in Swat and will have a better figure by the end of this week.  Most of the displaced are thought to have taken shelter with family or friends, although Tippu Khan said there are \"a few\" who came forward for assistance and are currently housed in unused government buildings. As far as UNHCR is aware, there is no one in tents at this time.  Afghans are not at issue here as such, but Zwack was assured that all residents in potential danger, both Pakistani and Afghan, have been told to leave the areas of risk, and anyone who asks for assistance will be helped, regardless of nationality.  6.  (C) COMMENT.  In what form, or how soon, meaningful assistance mechanisms will be delivered is not yet known. The Red Crescent and ICRC are both in the initial stages of assistance and UNHCR is on the sidelines, so it may not be  ISLAMABAD 00005060  002 OF 002   soon enough.  Nights in Swat continue to grow colder, although there is no snow yet, but the confrontation between militants and the military shows little sign of abating.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/29/2007 12:41", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005085  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: MUSHARRAF'S LEGACY AND THE RETURN OF THE TROIKA  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  With his retirement as Chief of Army Staff (COAS) November 28 and his inauguration November 29 as a civilian president, Pervez Musharraf begins another chapter in Pakistan's rocky road to democracy.   By ceding control of Pakistan's strongest institution, Musharraf knows he faces a decline in both his power and prestige.  Although Musharraf plans to continue influencing policy, he has admitted publicly that he is returning Pakistan to its traditional power troika of Army, President and Prime Minister.  The Army appears ready to return to barracks and hopefully now can concentrate on the battle with extremist militants. Musharraf continues to align himself as President with the Army side of this equation.  But the balance of power between President and Prime Minister will depend on the outcome of upcoming general elections.  Although marred by the continuing state of emergency, the big story here is the institutional one of a military dictator voluntarily turning over power to civilian governance.  Post's sources indicate Musharraf will announce November 29 that he will lift the state of emergency and restore the constitution on December 16, the last day candidates can withdraw from elections.  2.  (C)  Pakistanis continually are looking to the USG for signs of which candidate/party we are supporting and will be watching to see whether we take seriously Musharraf's decision to govern as a civilian.  We recommend continuing to stress the \"free, fair and transparent elections\" message which is being well-received by the Pakistani people and by meeting with all Pakistani candidates/parties.  End Summary.  The Embattled President -----------------------  3.  (C)  While he still sees himself as Pakistan's savior, Musharraf today is not the same popular, secure leader who felt confident enough in 2006 to appear on \"The Daily Show\" to sell his auto-biography.  To his credit, over eight years Musharraf provided Pakistan with more than five years of seven percent economic growth, encouraged women's rights, increased press freedom, tightened controls over Pakistan's nuclear weapons, provided extensively bilateral intelligence cooperation, and forced the Army to change its myopic focus on India as Pakistan's sole existential threat. In a society rife with corruption, Musharraf remains personally untainted, and he deeply believes he is moving Pakistan on a slow but deliberate path to democracy.  4.  (C)  When Musharraf made his ill-conceived decision to fire the former Chief Justice in March, his popularity at home and abroad was high, and he probably has been bewildered at how quickly everything has unraveled.  In retrospect, it is clear that economic growth had not filtered down to offset growing food and rent inflation among the poorer majority. Musharraf's own reforms had encouraged a critical and freer press as well as the development of bolder civil society groups   The former Chief Justice's popular rallies tapped a surprisingly deep well of economic discontent and a broad sense that the government was not delivering justice/law and order.  5.  (C)  Musharraf's personal fixation with the former Chief Justice distorted his political judgment as he compounded his initial mistake of firing the Chief Justice with a succession of bad decisions informed by a narrowing circle of advisors. Musharraf's delayed action over the Red Mosque operation and his decision to defy domestic and international warnings by suspending the constitution and imposing a state of emergency have weakened his popularity and his power.  What should, according to his master plan for Pakistan's democracy, have been a crowning moment of a transition to civilian leadership has been marred by criticism over firing the judiciary, arrests of politicians and civil society activists, and counter-productive media restrictions.  However, post's sources close to the presidency indicate Musharraf will announce to the nation November 29 that he will lift the state of emergency and restore the constitution on December 16, the last day candidates can withdraw from elections.  6.  (C)   Although we view Musharraf's decision to join with the U.S. after 9/11 as necessary and pragmatic, it was a  ISLAMABAD 00005085  002 OF 003   courageous step at home that has been a mixed blessing for him politically.  Musharraf tried, with only limited success, to reverse the pro-Islamic tendencies that former President General Zia al-Haq introduced into Pakistan.  Plans to control extremist madrassas have been only marginally successful, while Musharraf devoted insufficient resources to basic health, education and law enforcement programs. Musharraf's efforts to overcome the effect of twenty plus years of Pakistani ties with the pro-Taliban elements fighting the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan remain a work in progress.  As the local  reaction to the July Red Mosque operation and continued widespread anti-Americanism show, Pakistanis remain deeply ambivalent about what still is viewed as an American war on Islamic militants.  A growing number of suicide bombings and the recent militant takeover in the settled areas of Swat have begun to alter public opinion, and Musharraf now has an opportunity as a civilian leader to develop the political support the Army needs to win this battle.  Back to Barracks ----------------  7.  (C)  The Army is viewing Musharraf's departure with mixed emotions.  On one hand, they technically are losing someone who has been a powerful ally in the office of the President. However, Musharraf's growing political unpopularity tainted the Army itself, which has come under unprecedented public criticism.  The Army's declining reputation has been affected by allegations of questionable land acquisitions and unfair economic influence by current and/or retired Army officers. Within the institution itself, morale has dropped over reports of inadequate equipment and logistical support for troops in the field and embarrassment over soldiers who are surrendering to militants without a fight.  8.  (C)   The new COAS, General Ashfaq Kayani, is a long-time and trusted Musharraf ally who is uncomfortable with the sudden glare of international attention and speculation about his future role in the power troika.  In recent meetings with us, Kayani has been at pains to state his continued loyalty to Musharraf, but Kayani has also gone to some lengths to express his loyalty as a soldier to a leader (the President) and the rule of constitutional law. Interestingly, restating the military's loyalty was a major theme at the farewell dinner for Musharraf hosted by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs for Musharraf on November 27.  9.  (C)  For the next few months, this undercurrent of nervousness will persist as both the Army and Musharraf revert to their traditional bureaucratic norms after eight years of Musharraf being both President and COAS.  Gradually, however, we expect Kayani to assert himself as defender of Pakistan's national interests.  When Musharraf lifts the state of emergency and returns Pakistan to normal governance, there should be little divergence between Musharraf's interests and those of the Army.  10.  (C)  For months, Musharraf has been preoccupied with his own political future and has either ignored or paid insufficient attention to the deteriorating security situation in the tribal areas and Swat.  It is encouraging, therefore, that with his appointment as Vice Chief, Kayani immediately visited troops in the tribal areas and is implementing a more robust offensive against militants. (Note: It is still unclear if the Amry's new strategy will be effective, but at least Kayani appears fully engaged.)  In Kayani, we believe we have a committed partner and will pursue with him efforts to redouble GOP actions against militants.  The Next Prime Minister? ------------------------  11.  (C)  The third leg of the Pakistan power troika is, at the moment, very uncertain.  The return from exile of Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto and Pakistan Muslim League-N leader Nawaz Sharif will level the playing field if, as we expect, they both agree to contest the election.  In the campaign, the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party will be led by Pervaiz Elahi, the former Chief Minister of Punjab.  The government retains a significant ability both  ISLAMABAD 00005085  003 OF 003   to sway the electorate through traditional spoils or determine the outcome through behind the scenes manipulation.  But it appears that none of the three major parties will win a sufficient majority in the January elections to form a new government.  The political horse trading over possible coalitions has begun even before serious campaigning gets underway.  It is simply too soon to call a winner or predict how stable the next coalition government will be.  12.  (C)  Neither Bhutto nor Sharif can become Prime Minister until the constitution is amended to lift the current two-term limit on prime ministers.  With convictions on the books, both also face scrutiny over their ability to even qualify as candidates for the National Assembly.  To avoid possible charges of treason, Musharraf will need a two-thirds vote in the next National Assembly to approve his Provisional Constitutional Order.  13.  (C)  Constitutionally, the President still retains the power to fire the Prime Minister, and the Parliament has the power to remove (with a two-thirds majority) the President. Given the animosities among Musharraf, Bhutto and Sharif, the constitutional order could yield surprises for any of them, including the new civilian President.  The key will be how well these three and their parties perform in the January elections.  14. (C)  Comment:  Although marred by the continuing state of emergency, the big story here is that a military dictator voluntarily turned over power to civilian governance.  In the coming days, Pakistanis will be looking to the USG for signs of which candidate/party we are supporting and whether we take seriously Musharraf's decision to govern as a civilian. We recommend, therefore, that the USG continue to press publicly for free, fair and transparent elections and be in contact with all Pakistan's parties and candidates. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/30/2007 3:45", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005086  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O.12958: DECL: 10/02/2017 TAGS: ENRG, ETTC, PREL, EPET, ELTN, PK, IN, IR SUBJECT: Ministerial Meeting on Turkmen- Afghan-Pakistan- India pipeline postponed   Classified by Anne W. Patterson for reasons 1.4(b) and (d)  1. (C) Summary:  A Ministerial meeting to further discussions on the Turkmen- Afghan- Pakistan- India(TAPI) pipeline has been postponed. Pakistan media implies that Turkmenistan's gas deals with Russia are the reason for the delay and not Pakistan's state of emergency. Pakistan continues to seek US involvement in curbing Russian interference in regional energy discussions. End Summary.  2. (C) A Ministerial level meeting to discuss the proposed Turkmenistan-Afghanistan- Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline which was scheduled to take place in Islamabad on November 27 and 28 has been postponed.  Pakistani officials are now working with the Asian Development Bank to reschedule the Ministerial meeting in December. Ministry of Petroleum officials inform Post that India did not plan to participate in this November Ministerial meeting but indicated that India is \"taking more interest in this project than the other one.\" (Comment: The \"other one\" refers to the Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline.)  3. (C) Pakistani officials are not citing the current state of emergency as the reason for cancellation of the ministerial but rather are noting that Turkmenistan scheduled further talks with Russia's gas giant Gasprom for the same dates.  Local media report that Gasprom has signed a new agreement with Turkmenistan for increased Europe-bound gas supplies, which would increase gas deliveries to about 50 billion cubic meters (BCM), and notes that Gasprom will pay 50 percent higher prices to Turkmenistan next year. Local media also report that such a revised agreement means that Turkmenistan would have little surplus gas available for export to the South Asian region.  4. (C) Comment: Pakistan is facing a massive energy shortfall and is looking at all available options to purchase additional energy and diversify supplies.  At the September Strategic Dialogue discussions in Islamabad, and at subsequent Embassy meetings, GOP officials requested USG assistance to counteract \"the Russian influence.\"  GOP officials express frustration that the TAPI negotiations cannot move forward more quickly and that Russia interferes in Central Asia energy discussions.  The TAPI pipeline's proposed 2012 completion date is unrealistic.  Additional challenges to this project also include mitigation of the security risks in Afghanistan and Balochistan, improvement in India-Pakistan relations, and phasing out Pakistani fuel subsidies to ensure that this project is not a total drain on the Pakistani treasury.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD3871", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/30/2007 10:32", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005091  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EPET, ENRG, EMIN, ETRD, EAID, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN TO MISS DEADLINE FOR 2008 AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY PROPOSAL  REF: ISLAMABAD 3871  1. (SBU) Summary: Due to the upcoming elections in Pakistan and current caretaker government, Government of Pakistan (GOP) approval for the proposed USGS and NRL geophysical survey is not possible in advance of the December 1 deadline.  Post will continue to advocate for project approval so that the survey can take place in 2009. Post appreciates USGS and NRL support. End Summary.  2. (SBU) Contacts in the Pakistani Armed Force's Joint Headquarters Planning Division informed Embassy Islamabad Senior Air Force Representative that the GOP is not in a position to garner full approval of a proposed airborne geophysical survey of the country prior to the upcoming January elections.  3. (SBU) The survey, jointly proposed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), is designed to be a multiphase, airborne survey of Pakistan.  Collected data would be utilized for the analysis of natural resources, soil composition, hydrology, earthquake hazard analysis and civil infrastructure planning.  There was a narrow window of opportunity to secure GOP permission for a 2008 survey.  The USGS-NRL team required notification by December 1, 2007 to begin preparation for a January - April 2008 survey.  4. (SBU) Comment: There is widespread support for the geophysical survey in Pakistan's scientific community and Government Ministries (reftel).  While the deadline for project implementation in 2008 has passed, Post continues to believe that the project is worthwhile and will advocate on its behalf.  Following the January 2008 elections and formation of a new government, we will engage our GOP interlocutors on the project, aiming to secure permission for 2009 survey dates.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "11/30/2007 14:17", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 02 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005099  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/30/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN UPDATE:  WEEK OF NOVEMBER 26  Ref:      None _____________________________________________ ____________________  Classified By: Polcouns Candace Putnam, for reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Sporadic protests by lawyers, journalists and students continued around the country the week of November 26, and opposition political party leaders continued to debate whether to boycott the January 8 elections.  In the wake of Pervez Musharraf's retirement as Chief of Army Staff, his second-term inauguration as President, and his announcement that the State of Emergency (SOE) and Provisional Constitutional Order would end on December 16, most politicians are busy filing their candidate nomination papers.  The Ministry of Interior announced that only 37 people detained under the SOE remained in detention.  The United Arab Emirates lifted the block on transmission of Geo TV from Dubai, but Geo is not yet back on cable TV in Pakistan.  With Codel Bennett, Ambassador raised the ongoing visa  problems of IRI and The Asia Foundation with President Musharraf and Foreign Minister Haq..  End summary.  Protests Continue -----------------  2. (U) On November 29, police baton-charged rock-throwing lawyers protesting in Lahore; the GOP denied tear gassing the group and reported that lawyers who had been detained in the protest had been released.  On November 28, lawyers and journalists held a small, joint demonstration at the Peshawar High Court to protest the sacking of the judiciary and media restrictions.  Although the protest was dispersed peacefully, the lawyers vowed to continue their demonstrations until the state of emergency is lifted.  In addition, many of the student wings of the Peshawar political parties, including the Pakhtun Students Federation, the Peoples Student Federation, the Muslim League Students Federation, and Islami Jamiat Talaba (JTI), are planning to organize small protests over the coming days.  3. (U) The lawyers of Rawalpindi, Attock, and Taxila observed November 29 as a Black Day to protest Musharraf's inauguration under the 1973 Constitution.  The same day, the Lahore Bar Association held a rally as it also observed a Black Day against Musharraf's inauguration.  In Karachi and Balochistan, the lawyers continue to hold daily one-hour strikes.  To Boycott or Not to Boycott ----------------------------  4. (U) The All Parties Democratic Movement (APDM) held meetings in Lahore that continued through November 30 to consider whether to boycott the January elections.  To date, the APDM does not have a firm boycott policy despite multiple press announcements by its members.  At a press conference in Peshawar on November 30, Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) announced it would boycott both the provincial and national elections in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  The Pakistan Tehreek Insaaf (PTI), led by Imran Khan also announced an intention to boycott the elections.  The Awami National Party (ANP) and Jaamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F), however, said they would not boycott.  Nawaz Sharif, leader of the Pakistan Muslim League-N party, indicated publicly that his party would boycott but it is not clear if it actually will not participate in elections.  5.  Benazir Bhutto of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) indicated in press statements that her party would take part in the upcoming elections but under protest and with the right to boycott as the election approaches.  6.  Meanwhile, the Election Commission reported that it has received 13,490 nomination papers for a total of 265 National Assembly and 566 provincial assembly seats.  Arrests/Detentions ------------------  7.  (U) The Ministry of Interior (MOI) announced on November 27 that during the first few weeks of the state of emergency, approximately 5,750 individuals were arrested but only 37 currently remained behind bars.  Of those still imprisoned, five are detained under the Maintenance of Public Order (MPO)  Ordinance and the remaining prisoners are charged with acts of violence.  The five currently detained under the MPO include the current Supreme Court Bar Association President Aitzaz Ahsan, Justice (ret.) Tariq Mehmood, and three other lawyers.  According to media reports, the members of the deposed Supreme Court, who have been under house arrest in the Islamabad judges' enclave since November 3, were ordered to be forcibly removed from their government homes.  Media -----  8. (U) On November 29, the media authorities in Dubai announced that they will once again allow Geo TV to resume its broadcast from Dubai. However, the GOP has not yet restored Geo's access to cable TV inside Pakistan.  In support of the channel, several small-scale demonstrations took place around Pakistan, including marches from the Lahore Press Club to the Geo office by lawyers and civil society organizations on November 27 and a similar march conducted by approximately 100 university students on November 28.  IRI/TAF -------  9.  (U)  With visiting Codel Bennett, Ambassador raised with President Musharraf and FM Haq our concern that the International Republican Institute (IRI) continues to receive GOP letters advising them to leave the country.  Ambassador also raised our concern that the local director of The Asia Foundation (TAF) has had his visa canceled.  Both IRI and TAF are implementing USAID- and DRL-funded election and democracy projects in Pakistan.  Both the President and the Minister promised to try and resolve these problems.  10.  (C)  Comment:  In the wake of Pervez Musharraf's retirement as Chief of Army Staff, his second-term inauguration as President, and his announcement that the State of Emergency and Provisional Constitutional Order would end on December 16, most politicians are busy filing their candidate nomination papers.  Although protests continue, the media is turning its attention to the cycle of vote swapping and political coalition building that is the norm for election season in Pakistan.  We believe that most detainees have indeed been released but expect the MOI to vigorously enforce the Election Commission's code of conduct (septel) that limits large political rallies for security reasons.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2007 9:12", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005100  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: IMRAN KHAN STICKS TO HIS PRINCIPLES   Classified By: Polcouns Candace Putnam, for reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: With little to lose personally, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) leader Imran Khan is working to convince Pakistan's opposition parties to boycott the January general elections.  Khan predicted any coalition government formed after the election would be short-lived and suggested that Pakistan Muslim League-N (PML-N) leader Nawaz Sharif should boycott now to bolster his future chances.  Khan predicted elections in the Northwest Frontier Province and the tribal areas would be violent. End Summary.  2. (C) PolCouns and PolOff November 27 met PTI leader Khan at his Islamabad farm. Sporting a pressed white shalwar kameez and a vintage Rolex watch, Khan was characteristically charismatic. He stated flatly that he was not going to participate in the upcoming elections out of \"solidarity\" with the lawyers movement.  3. (C) Khan said he would try to convince Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) leader Nawaz Sharif to join his electoral boycott and hoped that Sharif's decision would also convince Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto to follow suit.  Khan noted that the majority of Sharif's political base comes from his anti-Musharraf positions and--unlike Bhutto--his unwillingness to cut deals with Musharraf.  Therefore, Sharif's electoral prospects would be \"over\" if he participated in the upcoming race because it would show complicity with Musharraf.  Khan also predicted that the next coalition government would be short-lived, so it made sense for Sharif to sit this round out and reap the rewards of sticking to his principles in the next election.  4. (C) Khan was pessimistic about his country's near-term political prospects. Khan predicted a high level of electoral violence in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and in his own district in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP).  Khan said growing resentment towards Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman would cost the religious bloc votes and predicted that nationalist parties, particularly the Pashtun Awami Nationalist Party, would pick up JUI-F seats. Assuming Sharif and Bhutto participate in the election, Khan said personal interests might compel Sharif, Bhutto, or Musharraf to form a coalition, but personal animosity among the three would undermine any potential partnership within a year.  5. (C) Comment: Khan, whose PTI party is effectively a one-man show, has little to lose personally in supporting a boycott.  His credibility rests with his self-created role as the politician who sticks to his principles, and he is popular with the Pakistani intelligentsia and elements of the disaspora.  But Khan has never been able to turn his starring role as the captain of Pakistan's only team to win the international cricket championship into an effective political party.   End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4890", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2007 9:23", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005101  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PHUM SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MEETS CARETAKER PRIME MINISTER  REF: ISLAMABAD 4890  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: During a courtesy call with Ambassador, Caretaker Prime Minister Muhammedmian Soomro reiterated the government's commitment to facilitate election observers.  He promised immediate action to resolve eviction notices and visa problems of the International Republican Institute and The Asia Foundation, both of which are working on election programs funded by the USG.  Soomro looked to the political parties, the domestic media, and the international community to ensure free and fair parliamentary elections on January 8.  He informed the Ambassador that the state of emergency \"would be phased out,\" leaving some remote areas under emergency rule.  Soomro was unsympathetic to GEO TV, the last broadcaster to remain off the air because of state of emergency restrictions.  End Summary.  2. (C) The Ambassador met November 28 with Pakistan's Caretaker Prime Minister (and Senate Chairman) Muhammedmian Soomro.  Constitutionally, Soomro's primary duty as caretaker is to oversee Pakistan's election process until a new government can be formed following the January 8 parliamentary elections.  IRI/TAF Problems ----------------  3. (C) The Ambassador informed Soomro that U.S. and U.S.-sponsored election observer missions were currently finalizing their coverage plans and would likely increase the number of observers.  She welcomed statements by President Musharraf that Pakistan was open to all election observers, but noted that both the International Republican Institute (IRI) and The Asia Foundation's (TAF) domestic group had run into separate problems.  4. (C) IRI has been asked (twice) by the Economic Affairs Division to leave the country (we suspect after IRI published a poll showing Musharraf's declining popularity).  That Division has refused to sign a memorandum of understanding with the organization, which would allow it to continue its operation in-country.  Some of IRI's international observers are facing delays in receiving visas from Pakistani Embassies abroad.  In addition, TAF's local director had his Pakistani visa canceled (for unclear reasons) by the Interior Ministry.  Ambassador raised these issues with former Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao, but Sherpao was replaced by a caretaker minister before he resolved either the problems of either IRI or TAF.  5. (C) Soomro was surprised to hear these details and immediately ordered his staff to call the appropriate ministries to resolve both issues.  He echoed Musharraf's statements that observer missions would enjoy \"free access\" and that they would have the government's \"full support.\" Soomro added, \"We believe the more observers, the better, so there will be no doubt cast on these elections.\"  He then speculated that electoral fraud would be impossible because of the intense focus of the international community and of domestic media.  Free and Fair Elections -----------------------  6. (C) However, Soomro placed responsibility for a credible election process on the shoulders of Pakistan's political parties.  \"As caretaker, I want wide participation,\" adding that he had tried to establish contact with the opposition to respond to their concerns.  He noted that most of these parties chose not to comment on the Election Commission's Code of Conduct for Political Parties.  Soomro rhetorically asked, \"If the political parties do not cooperate, how can the government react?\"  7. (C) For practical reasons, most (if not all) of the opposition would participate in the parliamentary elections, Soomro predicted.  He announced that the voter roll was now complete, though not yet posted on the Election Commission's website.  Referring to the military change of command ceremony earlier in the day, Soomro noted that this would be  ISLAMABAD 00005101  002 OF 002   \"the first truly peaceful transition\" from one government to the next.  State of Emergency ------------------  8. (C) Whether the state of emergency would be lifted before the elections, Soomro would only say: \"If things improve in Swat.\"  He predicted that emergency would be phased out, and \"only certain districts would remain under emergency.\" GEO TV: Odd Man Out -------------------  9. (C) The Ambassador repeated the U.S. position that the GOP should immediately allow GEO TV to begin broadcasting again. Soomro replied that \"only\" 38 of 75 channels were blocked on November 3.  Since then, all but the four GEO channels were back on the air.  Soomro would only say that the GOP and GEO were \"in discussions.\"  He claimed that all other stations had accepted the new media code of conduct: \"It is universal.\"  An exception just for GEO could not be made.  He concluded that the new code was \"in the public interest\" and \"drafted in consultation with media groups.\"  10. (C) Comment: As Caretaker Prime Minister, Soomro has little power to make wide policy decisions, but we will continue to press him on the conduct of the elections. Separately, Post has requested that the MFA expedite the visas of IRI's international observer team members.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2007 10:22", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005102  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/01/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: CODEL BENNETT'S MEETING WITH BENAZIR BHUTTO   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  With Codel Bennett November 30, Benazir Bhutto indicated she will participate in the January 8 general elections but asked for USG assistance in ensuring those elections are free and fair.  Codel members expressed support for ensuring the integrity of elections but noted the larger issues were to participate in the elections, fight extremism and build institutional support for democracy and rule of law.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Ambassador, Senator Bob Corker (R-TN), Congressman David Dreier (R-CA), Congressman Darrell Issa (R-CA) and Congressman Joe Wilson R-SC met November 30 with Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto at her Islamabad home.  3.  (C)  Bhutto thanked the USG for its support of free, fair and transparent elections in Pakistan and provided her views on the current security situation.  In the past, she said, the chief security concern was India, but this has shifted north to the Afghan border.  Growing militancy in the Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA) was seeping into settled areas like Parachinar, where Taliban forces have fueled Sunni-Shia sectarian violence.  Bhutto said the people of the area called her for assistance, but when she contacted the police authorities, they said they were being attacked and could not help.  The militants are exploiting the poverty of the area, and the only answer is democratization and education/employment programs.  The same was true for poor families who had no other option but to send their children to madrassa schools.  4.  (C)  Bhutto said she was pleased that President Musharraf had announced a date for lifting the State of Emergency and restoring the constitution.  But the current and former presidents of the Supreme Court Bar Association were still being detained, former Supreme Court judges were still under house arrest, and Geo TV was not yet back on cable in Pakistan. Bhutto still had great concerns that the elections would be rigged.  She repeated her public demands that the caretaker government be reconstituted as a neutral group of officials and that the nizams (mayors) who distribute government jobs and benefits be suspended until after the elections.  Bhutto expressed concern about \"ghost\" polling stations, the transfer of key electoral officials, reports of intimidation of PPP workers, and illegal distribution of early ballots. She had no faith in the Election Commission's ability to deter rigging.  5.  (C)  On the proposed boycott of opposition political parties, Bhutto said that he has spoken several times to Pakistan Muslim League-N leader Nawaz Sharif and had questioned the value of a boycott.  \"If we are making demands of the government, what exactly are those demands?  We need a clear common agenda if we are to unite as an opposition.\" The best path was to make the elections as free and fair as possible, and she called on the USG to assist in that process.  Nawaz was focusing on restoration of the fired judges, but Bhutto said that the electoral process was more important.  She was inclined to participate in elections to keep in touch base with her voter bank.  6.  (C)  Senator Corker expressed appreciation for Pakistan's efforts in fighting terrorism and promised to raise with President Musharraf our shared concern about the integrity of the elections.  7.  (C)  Congressman Dreier agreed that we wanted free and fair elections--he had seen some progress and would support a robust International Republican Institute (IRI) observer mission.  But, the larger issues were to support the rule of law and the development of institutions that could fight extremism.  That was the main reason the USG was engaged in Pakistan.  8.  (C)  Congressman Issa reiterated support for improving the electoral process but said that in reality there will be widespread voter fraud.  The important point was to participate so that PPP would have an opportunity to form or be a part of an eventual coalition government.  Issa said, admittedly, it is painful to the in the minority but it is  ISLAMABAD 00005102  002 OF 002   not fatal.  9.  (C)  Congressman Wilson noted that he had participated in elections observation in Bulgaria and had learned the importance of adequate training of poll watchers.  Bhutto agreed and thanked the USG for its support of programs implemented by IRI, the National Democratic Institute and others.  She noted particularly how helpful IRI polling had been.  10.  (C)  On her relationship with President Musharraf, Bhutto noted there were two fault lines in Pakistan: dictatorship vs. democracy and moderation vs. extremism.  She and Musharraf concurred on the latter but disagreed on the former.  Senator Corker asked about the state of their relations now, and Bhutto described them as \"stormy.\"  During 8-10 months of discussions, Musharraf had been easy to talk to, but when the talking was over, there were no results. Musharraf had reneged on promise after promise.  In the end, Musharraf had not agreed to Bhutto's demand that the constitutional two-term limit be lifted immediately after elections, and had not agreed to change the constitutional clause that allowed the President to fire the Prime Minister.  Bhutto felt that she was being set up for failure.  11.  (C)  Codel Bennett did not clear this message.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD1091|07ISLAMABAD1836|07ISLAMABAD1916|07ISLAMABAD2577|07ISLAMABAD2966|07ISLAMABAD3462|07ISLAMABAD3714|07ISLAMABAD4891|07ISLAMABAD836", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/1/2007 10:43", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005103  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN OCR REVIEW RECOMMENDATIONS  REF: A.  Islamabad 0836, B.  Islamabad 1091, C.  Islamabad 1836, D. Islamabad 1916, E.  Islamabad 2577, F.  Islamabad 2966, G. Islamabad 3462, H.  Islamabad 3714, I.  Islamabad 4891  1.  (SBU) Summary:  Embassy Islamabad recommends that Pakistan remain on the Watch List (WL) at the conclusion of the current Special 301 Out-of-Cycle Review.  While Pakistan has yet to live up to its commitment to enact TRIPS-consistent data protection legislation, we believe that it should remain on the Watch List until we can see the final results of the amendment, which is due to be finalized before the end of the year.  Despite some raids this fall, we continue to push the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to make more progress on prosecution and sentencing for arrested pirates. The inclusion of IPR in the Strategic and Economic Dialogues this fall has elevated the issue within the GOP, which we hope, over time, will help make the Intellectual Property Organization (IPO) an effective institution. There have been some improvements in enforcement capacity, notably at the Federal Investigative Agency (FIA).  With the exception of progress on data protection, the IPR situation in Pakistan remains largely unchanged from the spring 2007 Special 301 review.  End summary.  Data Protection ---------------  2.  (SBU) Pakistan promised to enact TRIPS-consistent data protection legislation in 2006.  The GOP is sprinting to the finish line on data protection, with the amendment to the 1976 Drugs Act anticipated by the end of the year.  GOP officials at the Health and Commerce Ministries are well aware of the importance of enacting TRIPS-consistent data protection legislation to the outcome of the Out-of-Cycle  and Special 301 reviews.  3.  (SBU) Progress was been slow until mid-September, when this issue was raised at the Strategic Dialogue, chaired by Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte.  Then State Department Deputy  SIPDIS Assistant Secretary of Economic, Energy and Business Affairs Chris Moore also raised the data protection issue during the economic growth breakout session and during his bilateral meetings. Following these meetings, the Ministry of Health has been more forthcoming in sharing the draft legislation with both the USG and local stakeholders, and has held two meetings with the Pakistani pharmaceutical sector.  The U.S. pharmaceutical companies have been pleased with progress to date.  4.  (SBU) The Ministry of Health expects President Musharraf to sign an ordinance amending the 1976 Drugs Law before the end of the year.  However, we are not confident that this ordinance will be TRIPS-consistent, despite Embassy representations to senior officials at the Health Ministry, Ministry of Law, Higher Education Commission (which has an interest due to agricultural projects which produce intellectual property), IPO, and the Ministry of Commerce. IPO initially attempted to distance itself from data protection legislation, arguing that it was the responsibility of the Ministry of Health.  We have engaged in an educational process to explain the benefits to Pakistan's economy of data protection, and IPO appears to understand the importance of data protection for growth and innovating and is no longer distancing itself from Pakistan's WTO commitments.  5.  (SBU) Pakistan's foreign pharmaceutical companies believe that imperfect data protection is better than none at all, and are reassured that they will have additional opportunities to strengthen data protection through the issuance of implementing regulations and renewal of the ordinance every four months.  An ordinance may be amended prior to renewal.  We understand that negotiations with the foreign and domestic (generic) stakeholders continue to be difficult.  The domestic companies wield considerable political power and maintain that data protection is already sufficiently covered in existing Pakistani legislation.  IPO ineffective ---------------  6.  (SBU) The IPO has been increasingly ineffective over the past six months, despite the Embassy's efforts to include senior IPO management in training, organization of awareness seminars and other activities. The Board of Directors has not met for over a year, but we hope that a new Chairperson (the third since 2005) and Deputy Director will breathe new life into the organization, which continues to cite past achievements. IPO has not pushed for institution of a patent linkage system  Progress on enforcement capacity building -----------------------------------------  7.  (SBU) The Federal Investigative Agency (FIA) has been very  ISLAMABAD 00005103  002 OF 002   proactive in developing their IPR crimes investigation capabilities over the past year, but has yet to reap results.  FIA has set up IPR enforcement units in Islamabad, Lahore, Karachi and Rawalpindi, and hired a dedicated Director to oversee the four offices.  FIA has aggressively pursued international training opportunities; most of the unit attended a U.S. Embassy organized program on Cyber Crimes Investigations with the FBI, Microsoft, and IFPI in mid-August.  8.  (SBU) The FIA reports that it has conducted four raids on factories since the training that produced Hindi content cassettes. Although there has been some progress made in enforcement over the past year, the FIA has not conducted raids at the level it once did in 2005. In 2007, 8 arrests were made, and 173,150 CDs/DVDs seized. Laws are weak compared to the will of the FIA and lack of concern in the judicial system eradicates the FIA's efforts.  Lack of prosecution and sentencing for pirates --------------------------------------------- -  9.  (SBU) However, lack of prosecution and sentencing for pirates continues to plague IPR protection and enforcement.  FIA continues to be frustrated that retailers still openly sell pirated optical discs throughout Pakistan.  Known counterfeiters are not brought to justice because the laws currently in place do not give FIA and the police the proper authority to arrest and prosecute IPR criminals. The judicial system continues to see IPR cases as a minor offense with no punishment more severe than those served to shoplifters, if at all.  Many who file complaints against IPR violators do not come forward which makes prosecution increasingly difficult. IFPI has been very complimentary regarding optical disk enforcement in Pakistan, and have indicated in meetings with the former Prime Minister and DCM its members' interest in investing in Pakistan.  IPR awareness low ------------------  10.  (SBU) IPR awareness continues to be low among law enforcement officials, the judiciary, and the general public.  Law enforcement officials and the judiciary question why IPR violations are a crime.  The Embassy is organizing its first IPR awareness seminars for early 2008 in Islamabad, Lahore and Karachi in early 2008.  IPO's efforts in this area have been inadequate, and we believe that they have not taken advantage of the international resources available, instead concentrating their public outreach on conferences on book publishing and TRIPS flexibility, rather than on sensitizing the Pakistani public to the need for IP protection.   Comment -------  11.  (SBU) Comment: We recommend that Pakistan remain on the Watch List until we can see the outcome of the long-awaited data protection amendment.  If the amendment and/or its implementation are not consistent with TRIPS, then the interagency committee should revisit Pakistan's Special 301 status during the spring Special 301 regular review.  We will continue to pursue opportunities to provide training and increase IPR protection awareness among the general public and GOP officials.  We are hopeful that a new government following the January 8 national elections will breathe new blood into the IPO and continue to maintain FIA's momentum on increased IPR enforcement.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/4/2007 15:36", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005138  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH NAWAZ SHARIF  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  During a one and a half hour meeting December 3 with Pakistan Muslim League-N party leader Nawaz Sharif and his brother Shahbaz, Ambassador outlined USG support for free and fair elections with the participation of all parties.  Nawaz indicated that he would boycott the elections but reserved a final decision until after consultations later that day with Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto.  He wanted to convince Bhutto to boycott and then form a national unity government where they would alternatively share power.  He maintained his public line about restoring the judiciary as the key to Pakistan's future.  Nawaz had been \"disappointed\" and \"hurt\" that President Bush did not know him, according to advisors who went to great pains to defend Nawaz's pro-U.S., \"anti-mullah\" history. PML-N wants good relations with the U.S., but believes America should support a more balanced policy towards the political parties.  End Summary.  2.  (C)  Ambassador and Poloff met for an hour and a half December 3 with former Prime Minister and leader of the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) in his newly refurbished Lahore estate.  Also in the meeting were Nawaz's brother Shahbaz Sharif, former Petroleum Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan and former Finance Minister Muhammed Ishaq Dar.  Nawaz spent a good deal of the meeting reliving past history, beginning with how Musharraf had not allowed him to return from exile to attend his father's funeral.  The meeting was more cordial that we expected, given PML-N's public posturing about being independent from the U.S.  Overall, Nawaz was calm, even placid, especially in comparison with his more agitated and eloquent brother, Shahbaz.  Nawaz allowed Shahbaz and the former ministers to take the harder line and provide much of the detailed arguments in favor of his positions.  After the meeting, Nawaz went out of his way to avoid discussing with the press any differences with the USG position on the proposed boycott.  3.  (C)  As the Election Commission had just rejected his nomination papers, Shahbaz launched into a detailed defense of the charges (absconding, loan default and murder) against him.  The charges were either baseless or resolved, he insisted, and he would not appeal the decision because it meant recognizing illegal courts.  4.  (C)  Ambassador asked if Nawaz was determined to boycott the elections.  Nawaz responded that Musharraf's voter strength rested on former Nawaz supporters and today Musharraf would be lucky to win one-fifth of the National Assembly if elections were free and fair.  But, he asked, how can we participate if our papers are rejected and Musharraf has hand-picked the courts and the Election Commission? There was no consultation with other parties on naming the now biased caretaker government, lawyers like Aitzaz Ahsan were still in detention, and the press was being restricted. We don't see a level playing field anywhere, he insisted. Pervaiz Elahi (former Chief Minister of Punjab) is calling he shots behind the scene.  The Election Commission transferred judges just before the deadline and controls the vote counting.  5.  (C)  Ambassador detailed USG plans to support election observer missions staffed by the International Republican Institute, The Asia Foundation and the Mission and said we were encouraging the European Union to go forward with its observer mission as well.  We were not naive about the history of electoral manipulation in Pakistan, but we hoped that the presence of observers would help discourage fraud. Nawaz responded that the (intelligence) agencies controlled everything; Musharraf needed a two-thirds majority in the next Assembly to avoid treason charges, and the agencies would get it for him.  6.  (C)  Nawaz said he would sit down with Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto later in the day and hoped to convince her to join the boycott.  He would suggest that he and Bhutto agree to a national unity government under which they would trade off being prime minister.  Asked how he arrived at a national unity government without participating in elections, Nawaz said his party would go to the streets with the support of the lawyers and civil society.  ISLAMABAD 00005138  002 OF 003    7.  (C)  Nawaz appealed to the U.S., UK, and European Union to press Musharraf to reinstate the judiciary.  Asked to clarify what that meant, Nawaz said everything should be rolled back to November 2 (i.e., before the state of emergency and the Provisional Constitutional Order). Ambassador said this was just too difficult, given Musharraf's position on the former Chief Justice.  The USG had called for all detainees, including the judges to be released, and we wanted to see the judiciary begin functioning normally again.  Was there a way to restore some of the judges?  Nawaz asked if President Bush or the leader of any civilized country could simply fire the Supreme Court and get away with it.  8.  (C)  Nawaz continued on this theme, saying that a corrupt judiciary has been a problem in Pakistan for the last 60 years; Justice Chaudhry for the first time reversed the \"doctrine of necessity.\"  If the people abandoned the judges who stood up for an independent judiciary, where was Pakistan's future?  Musharraf, he said, should have waited for the ruling on his case and simply accepted his fate, one way or another.  If he had lost, there would have been free and fair elections and the country would have been able to move on.  General Kayani (the new Chief of Army Staff) was a good man (formerly Nawaz's deputy military secretary) and would have ensured an orderly transition.  9.  (C)  Ambassador stressed again that the USG believed the way forward was through the electoral process.  The USG had an enormous counter-terrorism stake in Pakistan.  Our goal was political stability and democratization.  We know that elections will not take place under ideal conditions, but we need to move ahead.  Nawaz asked \"our papers have been rejected, so how do we participate?\"  Pro-U.S./Anti-Mullah --------------------  10.  (C)  Nawaz allowed his former ministers to make a long and detailed case defending Nawaz's pro-American and anti-militant stance.  Ali Khan and Dar both said that they had been \"disappointed\" and \"hurt\" to read that President Bush did not know Nawaz and felt the U.S. was unfairly supporting Bhutto and Musharraf.  They recounted Nawaz's meetings with former President Clinton, who had praised Nawaz for pulling back from the nuclear brink after the Kargil debacle.  They said the religious parties had never won more than 11% of the vote in Pakistan, and that was only when Musharraf was in power.  Nawaz put forces in the street to oppose the mullahs supporting Saddam at a time when Bhutto ignored them.  Nawaz was the first to privatize the national bank, the first to lay the groundwork for reconciliation with India, the first to fight the Taliban.  11.  (C)  Musharraf, they claimed, only supported the U.S. after 9/11 out of necessity, and he always asks for something in return.  Musharraf has wrecked Pakistan's institutions, and the U.S. should carefully re-think its policies.  To win the fight against extremists, you must win hearts and minds and Musharraf is too unpopular for that.  PML-N wants good relations with the U.S. and considers America a good ally, but its policy needs to be better balanced.  12.  (C)  Ambassador replied that the USG recognizes that the PML-N is a secular party, and when President Bush said he didn't know Nawaz, that was the truth as they have no history together.  She promised to convey Nawaz's messages to Washington.  The U.S. is neutral on the elections and we will work with whomever the Pakistani people elect.  Our primary focus was the deteriorating security situation in the tribal areas and now in the settled areas.  We were concerned that we were not winning this war, and we needed to work together with Pakistan to defeat militant extremism.  The best way to do that was with a government chosen through free and fair elections.  13.  (C)  Selective history and idealism aside, our sources continue to believe that Nawaz will not boycott the election because most of his party wants a chance to return to power. The government's decision to reject the nomination papers of Shahbaz (and subsequently Nawaz) will not help convince PML-N  ISLAMABAD 00005138  003 OF 003   to participate.  Nawaz does not appear to have thought through the option of taking a boycott to the streets.  His party was not able to deliver mass demonstrations when he was deported September 10, and his party structure after eight years in exile is weak.  His subtle message was that he was counting on the Army to step and remove Musharraf after street demonstrations.  We are concerned that this option would introduce violence and uncertainty that, again, would distract from our primary mission of fighting extremism.  But we have little leverage over Nawaz and should concentrate our efforts in reinforcing what appears to be Bhutto's decision to participate in elections.  If she goes forward, we still believe that Nawaz will--however reluctantly--follow suit.        PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/5/2007 1:48", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005139  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O.  12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTANI ECONOMY WEATHERS STATE OF EMERGENCY  Summary  1. (SBU) The imposition of a state of emergency and political uncertainty has markedly affected Pakistan's ability to attract and retain portfolio investment, its exchange rate and the wholesale and retail business. There have been large outflows from the stock exchange; foreign investors have withdrawn USD200 million from the equity markets during the last two months.  The State Bank has intervened twice in the inter-bank market to stabilize the exchange rate. However, other economic indicators continue to perform well. Inbound foreign direct investment crossed the one billion dollar mark in July-October, and recorded close to 4 percent growth in this period. Worker remittances are up over 41 percent in October. According to independent economists, Pakistan's central bank is not contemplating any capital or foreign exchange controls. Though Moody's and the Standard and Poor have downgraded Pakistan's outlook from stable to negative, they have maintained the investment grade for Pakistan.  End summary.  ----------------------------------- Economic Policy:  Business as Usual -----------------------------------  2. (SBU) Imposition of the state of emergency has had no impact so far on the GOP's economic policy.  There have been no policy changes, and former de facto Finance Minister Salman Shah has been appointed Finance Minister in the caretaker government to underline that it is business as usual as far as Pakistan's economy is concerned.  He will remain in that position until a new government is formed after the January 8 elections.  Analysts noted no capital restrictions have been imposed.  3. (SBU) Asad Qureshi, the State Bank of Pakistan Executive Director, told Econoff that SBP is not contemplating capital controls.  It is not likely to substantially intervene in the foreign exchange market to support the rupee if foreign investors panic and head for the exits in the coming weeks. Instead, the central bank is likely to commit its foreign exchange reserves sparingly, and in a \"strategic manner\" to ensure orderly conditions in the exchange markets.  4. (SBU) In a November 25 speech, State Bank of Pakistan Governor, Dr. Shamshad Akhtar, said that Pakistan's economic prospects have remained strong despite recent political events, turmoil in the international financial markets, decreased liquidity due to the sub-prime mortgage dislocations, the depreciation of the dollar, and the surge in oil prices. Pakistan's economy has been resilient thus far to these external shocks because of its underlying financial health and strong macroeconomic fundamentals.  5. (SBU) Pakistan's key economic institutions continue to function normally. Since the imposition of the state of emergency, Pakistan signed an FTA with Malaysia and also approved the much anticipated petroleum policy to stimulate exploration in Pakistan (septel).  The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) conducted a successful T-bill auction and mopped up PRs35 billion (USD 573 million) with the same cut-off yields of 9.1 percent as before, with a total participation of PRs55 billion (USD901 million). On the international bond market, investors are now demanding a higher risk premium on grounds of security and political uncertainty. The 10-year Eurobond yield (issue 06/17) rose sharply to 9.20 percent from pre-emergency levels of 8.35 percent. Local bond yields have remained largely stable, at 10.1 percent for ten year bonds.  --------------------------------------------- - Rating Agencies Downgrade Outlook, but Maintain Investment Grades --------------------------------------------- --  6. (SBU) Following the November 3 imposition of a state of emergency, Moody's and Standard and Poor (S and P) cut Pakistan's outlook from \"stable\" to \"negative\" - primarily driven by the negative political developments. The country's investment grades have, however, been maintained at B1 and B+ due to Pakistan's good macroeconomic performance. While these ratings downgrades are closely monitored by international investors, analysts have been quick to point out that unlike previous states of emergency imposed in 1996 and 1999, there are no restrictions on capital movements, investment, or the exchange rate. Fears that Pakistan might face a mass exodus of foreign capital and experience turmoil in the financial and foreign exchange markets have not materialized.   ISLAMABAD 00005139  002 OF 003   ---------------------------- Remittances Surge in October ----------------------------  7. (SBU) Overseas Pakistanis sent home a record USD 580.2 million in October 2007 - up by 41.3 percent over the same period last year. This surge in remittances inflow reflects the growing confidence of expatriate Pakistanis on the current and future prospects of the economy.  During the first four months (July-October) of the current fiscal year, workers' remittances stood at USD 2.08 billion - up by 26.6 percent over the same period last year.  --------------------------------------------- ---- FDI Crosses the Billion-Dollar Mark but Portfolio Investment Drops Significantly --------------------------------------------- ----  8. (SBU) Foreign direct investment (FDI) crossed one billion-dollar mark.  According to State Bank of Pakistan, foreign direct investment during July-October increased by 3.9 percent to 1.3 billion dollars. In addition, Hong Kong-based Hutchison Whampoa, and UAE-based International Petroleum Investment Co, have signed multi-billion dollar agreements for the development of a deep water container terminal and the largest refinery in Pakistan respectively, which indicates the global players' confidence on the Pakistan economy. Hutchison plans to invest USD1 billion on this project while U.A.E Petroleum Investment Company will invest USD5 billion on the refinery which will be completed by 2011.  9.  (SBU) However, there have been large outflows from the Special Convertible Rupee Accounts (Note: These accounts represent the portfolio investment inflows converted into rupees for investment in Pakistan's stock exchanges.  End note.)   Over the past two months (September 7 - November 7), there was net outflow of USD188.4 million from these accounts.  Outflows were USD353.9 million, while inflows were USD165.5 million. Portfolio investment declined by 31.3 percent to USD310.6 million dollars during July-October 2007, compared to the same period last year.  Ministry of Finance Economic Adviser, Ashfaque Hasan Khan, blamed the large portfolio outflows on the sub-prime fallout and global credit squeeze, rather than the imposition of emergency.  10. (SBU) Sherani remarked that portfolio investors are watching the political situation carefully, and particularly U.S. actions.  If investors believe that the U.S. will break with Musharraf, or if Bhutto boycotts elections, this could cause greater portfolio investment outflows.  Any sudden, massive outflows would have serious negative repercussions on the exchange rate and on the Karachi Stock Exchange, given the estimated USD4.8 billion stock of foreign portfolio investment.  Habib and Askhari bankers told Econoff that all project finance transactions are on hold until the political situation becomes clearer.  They thought that pending projects would not go through until after the January 8 elections.  ------------------------------- The Rupee Hits a Three Year Low -------------------------------  11. (SBU) The rupee hit a three year low on November 14, losing 22 paisas against the dollar due to political uncertainty.  This was the first major rupee depreciation in the last three years. The outflow from the stock market caused the fall in the rupee's value. From November 12-14, there was an outflow of USD88 million from the stock exchanges. The SBP injected USD70 to USD80 million in the inter-bank market during this period to stabilize the value of rupee. The State Bank of Pakistan once again intervened in the inter-bank market to prop up the Pak rupee as it fell to a 37 month low of Rs61.30 against US dollar on November 20th. The SBP was active in the market as banks were trying to buy dollars to cover the November 19th transactions. The SBP sold dollars in both spot and forward markets. As a result, the rupee strengthened by 35 paisas and closed at Rs 61.00 per dollar on November 20th. The SBP is intervening in the inter-bank market but not aggressively, since it judges that there is only a modest imbalance between supply and demand. Ministry of Finance Economic Adviser, Ashfaque Hasan Khan, however, said that there is no pressure on the rupee and the State Bank of Pakistan is intervening in the market to expand the band in which rupee should trade following IMF Article IV consultations. (Comment:  The IMF maintains that the rupee is pegged to the dollar and Pakistan needs to expand the trading band for rupee.  End Comment.)  ISLAMABAD 00005139  003 OF 003    ------------------------------------ Oil Price Increases Still Manageable ------------------------------------  12. (SBU) Pakistan is successfully weathering the rupee's depreciation and increases in oil prices so far.  Khadim Ali Shah Bukhari at Karachi's Brokerage House, told Econoffs that the impact of oil price shock is manageable and could be funded through a mix of reserve withdrawals and external debts.  Pakistan can easily raise USD4 billion while keeping the external debt-to-GDP ratio constant at 27.5% in FY2008.  However, he questioned whether Pakistan's ability to fund its large and growing oil import bill is sustainable, given the recent surge in oil prices and decreases in foreign inflows.  --------------------------------------------- --- Auto Sales Down; mixed reports on wholesale and retail business --------------------------------------------- ---  13. (SBU) According to the Pakistan Automobile Manufacturing Association, automobile sales have slowed markedly in the first four months of the current fiscal year, increasing only 4.1 percent, compared to 32 percent 5-year compound growth rate.  Sales increased 14.8 percent in October. This slowdown in sales can be attributed to high interest rates for car loans, which have increased to 16-17 percent from 7 percent in 2004.  14. (SBU) Reports on the effect of the state of emergency on retail sales are mixed.  The Chairman of the Karachi Wholesale Grocers Association was quoted in the media as saying wholesale business has dropped by 25 percent since the October 18 Karachi bombing and November 3 imposition of the state of emergency. However, one Association member told EconOff that he could not quantify the drop in business. He commented that retailers have stopped holding stocks due to uncertain conditions, which have slowed retail sales.  The Retailers Association claims that their sales have dropped by 50 percent.  ------- Comment -------  15. (SBU) Lingering uncertainty could slow private foreign fund inflows. If foreign inflows slow, Pakistan's large current account deficit would need to be financed at least in part though reserve drawdowns and external debt disbursements, which could, in turn, put additional pressure on the exchange rate. Pakistan's current account deficit decreased to USD 2.99 billion in July-October FY2008 from USD 3.51 billion during the same period last year. The improvement in current account balance is mainly due to increases in current account transfers and exports, which grew 10.7 percent during this period.  Merrill Lynch currently expects Pakistan's macroeconomic environment to remain stable and GDP growth to remain at 6.9 percent, driven by domestic consumption.  The government has also expressed confidence publicly and privately in its ability to meet its FY2008 economic targets.  16. (SBU) Comment continued:  Despite the large stock of foreign portfolio investment in equities and their tendency to flee, foreign exchange reserve adequacy remains comfortable at this point in time.  Portfolio-related outflows are likely to continue to cause stress on the rupee in the short term, at until the January 8 elections. Continued oil price increases combined with slow export growth, however, pose a greater threat to Pakistan's balance of payments. Current reserves of USD 14.7 billion will cover six months of imports. We are watching carefully to see whether the current political uncertainty begins to adversely affect the FDI and remittances inflows, which so far have discounted the uncertain conditions and continued increase.  If FDI and remittances begin to drop, oil prices continue to increase, and exports are slow, then Pakistan will have to make some serious economic policy adjustments. End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5019", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/5/2007 1:48", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005140  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PREL, EAID, MASS, SNAR, PK SUBJECT: FATA IMPLEMENTATION PLAN UPDATE (12/02/07)  REF:  ISLAMABAD 5019  1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: We will be advising the Pakistanis on mechanisms to improve civil-military coordination in the FATA. Outcomes in Swat could be a case study for future FATA operations; effective civil affairs follow-up will be needed to consolidate short term security gains by Pak forces and reverse the recent unraveling of government institutions at the district level. Torkham BCC construction continues on track. USAID is planning for a major FATA effort; new staff are arriving to ramp-up the OTI program based in Peshawar. NAS and DEA are moving forward with border enforcement and counter-narcotics training. Codel Bennett and staffers were briefed on our FATA strategies (November 30). END SUMMARY.  Encouraging Greater Pak Civil-Military Coordination --------------------------------------------- ------ 2.  (SBU) To enhance prospects for success in support of sustainable FATA development, we are identifying concrete steps - a blueprint - on ways to foster improved coordination among Pakistani civil and military officials. As a first step, Consulate Peshawar will take soundings at the FATA Secretariat and among Pak military officials working in FATA development. The goal is to have a Project Steering Committee mechanism in place to provide general project oversight and promote effective consultation with tribal leaders, NGOs, and Political Agents. Also, ODRP is working to bring a DOD team to Pakistan to develop an approach to improve civil-military coordination.  Post-Swat Operations: a Test Case for FATA ------------------------------------------ 3.  (SBU) With Pak military sweeps driving insurgents from many of the areas in Swat occupied earlier this year, the government will soon face a need for effective follow-up. The unraveling of Swat governance at the district level in recent years will require a major effort to rebuild civil institutions. Counter-Insurgency experts think that outcomes in Swat will be an instructive case study for future government counter-insurgency lines of operation in the FATA (civil and military).  Torkham Border Coordination Center (BCC) ---------------------------------------- 4. (SBU) Construction continues on the BCC, with the base of the perimeter wall complete and one side built to a height of three meters. Well drilling has reached 100 feet, roughly half the required depth. The project foreman and engineers are coordinating with CJTF-82 staff on site. The contractor has agreed to submit design plans for two additional guard towers and a wall that were not part of the original contract. Once CENTCOM approves, foundations for these new features can be poured prior to the onset of winter.  USAID FATA Implementation ------------------------- 5. (SBU) USAID continues its preparation for a major FATA program. A contract on Capacity Building will be signed by the end of December. A technical committee has reviewed proposals for Livelihoods programs; short-listed contractors will be asked to submit \"best and final\" proposals in early January so that agreements can be concluded in February. Two of the five Health project agreements will be amended this month to expand FATA health activities. Under the Ed-Links program, USAID expects its contractor to establish offices and develop work plans before the end of December.  USAID's Office of Transition Initiatives (OTI) --------------------------------------------- - 6. (SBU) Following a productive TDY stint focused on OTI start-up, Galeeb Kachra left Peshawar on  November 30. He confirmed that both IOM and Creative Associates (Implementing Partners) are working out of temporary office space in Peshawar while negotiations continue on permanent space and housing. OTI will participate in interviews of partners' key program staff; IOM and Creative expect to interact with the FATA Agency Development Advisor who will be co-located with the Political Agents. The OTI component of the FATA Development Program will be known formally as FATA Development Program-Government to Community (FDP-GC) and will use a modified version of the NWFP logo and the FDP-GC initials. There will be no use of USG or Partner \"branding\" on OTI projects.  NAS Border Enforcement Training ------------------------------- 7. (SBU) We welcome Glen Sapp, a new member of the mission team who will work as a border enforcement trainer. He has a strong  ISLAMABAD 00005140  002 OF 002   background in law enforcement and worked recently in Jordan at the Iraqi police training facility.  DEA Training Projects --------------------- 8. (SBU) The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is conducting a precursor chemical safety course for personnel of the Anti Narcotics Force and Frontier Corps, December 15-17 Training will be held at the FIA Academy in Islamabad and will focus on precursor chemical identification and safe handling practices. Participants will receive kits with equipment needed to process precursor chemical seizures safely.  Codel Briefings on FATA ----------------------- 9. (SBU) Country Team briefings (Nov 30) provided Codel Bennett (Utah) with background on our FATA strategy and mission objectives on FATA development and security. Codel also included Sen. Corker (TN), Rep. Dreier (CA), Rep. Issa (CA), and Rep. Wilson (SC). Separate briefings for accompanying codel staffers included a FATA update.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4832|07ISLAMABAD4947|07ISLAMABAD5054", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/5/2007 14:10", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005160  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, EAID, PHUM SUBJECT: USG SUPPORT FOR CREDIBLE PAKISTANI ELECTIONS  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5054      B. ISLAMABAD 4947      C. ISLAMABAD 4832  1. (U) Summary: Pakistanis will go to the polls on January 8 to choose new National and Provincial Assemblies.  It appears that none of the three major parties will receive enough votes to independently form a government, so political vote swapping and coalition building is in full swing.  Pakistan has a history of flawed elections, but our goal is to do everything possible to make these elections credible.  The Mission is implementing a multi-year democratization/electoral program with USG and international partners, who now meet weekly to coordinate activities. International Republican Institute (IRI) election observers will begin arriving next week; IRI will field a total of 65 observers coupled by The Asia Foundation's (TAF) 20,000 domestic observers.  Ref A describes Embassy's request for additional personnel and funding to support our own election observation mission.  End summary.  What's at Stake? ----------------  2. (SBU) On January 8, Pakistanis will vote to fill 342 seats in the National Assembly and a total of 728 seats in four Provincial Assemblies (Ref B).  Despite discussion of a possible boycott, it is likely that all the major political parties will participate in the elections.  Preliminary analysis indicates this could be a tight three-way race among the major parties -- Musharraf's Pakistan Muslim League (PML), Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP) -- leaving the smaller ethno-nationalist and religious parties holding the key to forming a coalition government.  3. (SBU) The results of the election and the ensuing horse-trading to form a coalition will determine Pakistan's government -- the Prime Minister and 38 federal ministers. Also, the new National Assembly may be called upon to ratify Musharraf's actions under the state of emergency, void corruption charges/convictions against former prime minister Benazir Bhutto, and remove the two-term limit for prime ministers Bhutto and Sharif.  Democracy Programs Long in the Works ------------------------------------  4. (U) Mission Pakistan has been preparing for the 2008 general elections through a multi-year, interagency democratization/electoral program.  With the overall strategic goal of strengthening the democratic process, our program has focused on eight goals: (1) computerizing a clean voter list, (2) improving election administration, (3) reviewing and updating the legal framework for elections, (4) encouraging regular interaction between Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) and the political parties, (5) ensuring voters are better informed on election issues and procedures, (6) supporting independent election observation, (7) enhancing the independence of the ECP, and (8) strengthening the election dispute resolution process.  5. (U) USAID provided $19 million to IFES to computerize the 2007 voter roll, build capacity within the ECP to manage the new computerized voter roll, provide voter education during the voter roll display period, and purchase 215,000 transparent ballot boxes.  (Note: Japan purchased another 215,000 of these ballot boxes.)  6. (U) Starting in 2004, USAID also spent $1.7 million, through the National Democratic Institute (NDI), to modernize and democratize Pakistan's political parties, improve their internal governance structures and processes, and encourage the emergence of a new generation of reform-minded party leaders.  7. (U) State's DRL provided $1.4 million to NDI to enhance the capacity of women politicians and candidates, increase opportunities for young political party activists to play a more significant role in party activities, facilitate the development and adoption of a code of conduct for political  ISLAMABAD 00005160  002 OF 003   parties, train the parties' poll watchers, and encourage voter awareness and participation in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA).  8. (U) Embassy's Public Affairs Section sponsored veteran journalist Arnold \"Skip\" Isaacs to conduct training workshops in the Peshawar area, throughout Punjab, and in Islamabad and Karachi for Pakistani journalists on best professional practices when covering elections.  PAS's Information Resource Center provided material at the ECP's request for a handbook it is compiling for election observers.  Focused on January 8 Elections ------------------------------  9. (SBU) The remaining components of the USG's democratization/electoral program are focused on the January 8 election day.  These projects are almost exclusively intended to stem electoral fraud.  Our stated objective has been a free, fair and transparent election -- something which no one can claim has ever been achieved in the country's history and which, despite the best efforts, is unlikely this time.  10. (SBU) Election discrepancies can be said to include a bloated voter roll because the former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court ordered the annexation of the corrupted 2002 list to the clean 2007 list.  Luckily, the two lists remain segregated, so our investment to computerize the voter roll (para 5) can still serve as a foundation for future elections.  Opposition parties also warn of \"ghost\" (non-existent) polling stations, pre-stuffed ballot boxes, and misreported totals from the polling stations to the reporting office.  More Eyes and Ears ------------------  11. (U) DRL is supporting the International Republican Institute's (IRI) observation mission with $2 million.  IRI had planned for 40 observers, including 22 long-term observers arriving immediately.  It appears now that USAID will be able to supplement this mission with an additional $1 million to fund 25 additional short-term observers.  IRI is establishing seven hubs throughout Pakistan, targeting key population centers, historically fraud-prone areas and possible swing districts.  12. (U)  Mission Pakistan has identified 84 districts which we believe are worth watching.  Some will be close contests, others may switch parties, and many are infamous for fraud. We will field a robust, mission-wide effort of 20-25 observer teams, which should be able to cover many of these \"watch list\" districts.  We will also coordinate with \"like minded\" missions, particularly with the British High Commission, in order to further extend the reach of bilateral diplomat-observers.  13. (U) USAID will contribute $700,000 toward a joint project with other international donors, supporting Pakistani NGO Free and Fair Election Network (FAFEN) in fielding 20,000 domestic observers in 110 districts.  USAID also is supporting UNDP's training of polling staff as well as domestic and international observers (including Mission Pakistan staff) with $1.5 million.  14. (SBU) Our efforts are rounded out by DRL funding at $2 million for FAFEN's parallel vote tabulation (PVT) and voter attitude survey.  FAFEN pollsters will set up camp at 30 randomly selected polling stations throughout the country. Nearly 8,000 sample points will be gathered to extrapolate parallel results.  These results, however, will not be released until 48 hours after the election close.  Opposition parties, specifically the PPP, have asked for a PVT in particular as a check on electoral fraud (allegedly by the ruling PML).  15. (SBU) Comment: Only a government that is perceived as being legitimate can provide the kind of effective partner the USG needs to fight the battle against extremism.  We are under no illusions that elections in Pakistan will be  ISLAMABAD 00005160  003 OF 003   completely free and fair, but we are doing everything we can to ensure that the elections are credible in the eyes of the Pakistani people and the international community.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5102|07ISLAMABAD5160", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/5/2007 15:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005161  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, EAID SUBJECT: BHUTTO CALLS ON THE AMBASSADOR  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5160      B. ISLAMABAD 5102  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto called on the Ambassador to thank her for the \"critical\" USG pressure that pushed Musharraf to resign from the Army and lift the state of emergency.  Bhutto shared her concern about the government's ongoing and planned efforts to rig the elections and said she was counting on the USG to ensure \"free and fair\" elections.  Bhutto shared an op-ed (faxed to SCA/PB) detailing some of her allegations, which is due to appear in the Washington Post or New York Times.  Bhutto tried to convince Nawaz Sharif not to boycott the elections and confirmed that the PPP and Nawaz's Pakistan Muslim League-N were working on a shared list of demands to present to the government.  But Bhutto made it clear that she will participate in elections.  Unsurprisingly, she predicted that the PPP would sweep Sindh province and do well in the Punjab.  End summary  2. (C) Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto called on the Ambassador at her residence December 5.  She was accompanied by PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem.  Bhutto thanked the USG for its public statements and private pressure, which she described as \"critical,\" encouraging President Musharraf to resign as Chief of Army Staff and end the state of emergency (expected December 16).  Bhutto added, however, that the international community must continue to call for the lifting of curbs on the media and the release of activists and judges.  A Litany of Fraud -----------------  3. (C) Bhutto said that she is counting on the USG to ensure a free, fair and transparent general election on January 8, 2008.  She came prepared with a list of stories and claims of how Pakistan's Election Commission and intelligence agencies are already rigging the upcoming elections and intimidating opposition candidates.  She charged that government officials were behind recent, politically-motivated violent acts, including a murder and a kidnapping.  Bhutto repeated her accusations that the government had 20,000 pre-stamped ballots ready to be cast for the ruling Pakistan Muslim League (PML).  She also repeated allegations of \"improvised polling stations,\" which did not really exist but which would have returns on election night.  Bhutto complained that nazims (mayors) were supposed to have stopped doling out government largesse, but many were still ordering new projects.  Meeting with Nawaz Sharif -------------------------  4. (C) Bhutto said that during her November 3 meeting with Pakistan Muslim League-N (PML-N) leader Nawaz Sharif, she warned him against boycotting the general elections.  She argued that, if PML-N sat out, it would only bolster Musharraf's party.  Bhutto added that Sharif was leaning in favor of a boycott because he was being pushed by some of the smaller parties.  However, most of the PML-N rank and file opposed a boycott.  (Note: Bhutto provided a draft op-ed outlining fraud allegations and the rationale for benchmarks, which she hoped would be placed in the Washington Post or New York Times in the next few days.  Post has faxed a copy of the draft to SCA/PB.)  5. (C) Bhutto said that Nawaz agreed to back off on a boycott only toward the end of their meeting.  The compromise was to draft joint PPP/PML-N demands to the government which, if not met, would trigger action.  Bhutto revealed that, for the PPP, action likely meant protests after the elections.  6. (C) Bhutto said she told Sharif to defer the issue of reinstating the judiciary, including the former Supreme Court Chief Justice, until after the elections and the seating of a new National Assembly.  Ambassador said that we, too, supported an independent judiciary, but had told Nawaz that reinstating the judiciary was too difficult right now.   ISLAMABAD 00005161  002 OF 002   PPP Prospects -------------  7. (C) Not surprisingly, Bhutto claimed her party would be \"the first past the post,\" garnering as much as 38 percent of the vote.  She admitted to being weak in Balochistan, but predicted pick-ups in Karachi, in the Frontier Province (NWFP), and in Punjab's cities.  She said the PPP would \"sweep\" rural Sindh and southern Punjab.  8. (C) If Musharraf had no more than a 20 percent approval rating, as a recent, yet-to-be-released International Republican Institute (IRI) poll showed, Bhutto predicted that Musharraf's party would be badly defeated.  She was grateful for USG support of a parallel vote tabulation (PVT) to help ensure polls are translated into reality election night, and urged the USG to consider contingency responses if the elections are not \"judged free and fair.\"  9. (C) Comment: Privately, PPP aides tell us they expect Nawaz to participate in the elections.  We expect the PPP to send us frequent updates on their allegations of electoral fraud over the next 35 days before the election.  We are working behind the scenes to strengthen anti-fraud measures and will continue to press the Europeans to join our observer missions.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/6/2007 13:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005178  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2017 TAGS: EAID, PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S ELECTORAL CODE OF CONDUCT  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The Election Commission of Pakistan has now issued its Electoral Code of Conduct for the January elections.  With no enforcement mechanisms, it will have little impact except to generate political party complaints. On November 27, the Ministry of Interior released further \"unofficial guidance\" which severely limits political processions and rallies in the name of security.  Comments by officials from President Musharraf on down that the MOI rules will be strictly implemented are being interpreted by opposition parties as an infringement on their right to campaign freely, but the parties will be the first to blame the government for another bomb at a political rally.  End Summary.  ECP Code of Conduct -------------------  2. (U) On November 20, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP), released the Code of Conduct for Political Parties and Contesting Candidates for the forthcoming January 8 general elections. A draft version of these outlined regulations was originally distributed through electronic and print media in October and given to the political parties for comment by November 6.  The ruling Pakistan Muslim League submitted its thoughts on the draft, and a few opposition parties reported that they had planned to do likewise.  However, when President Musharraf declared a state of emergency on November 3, several of these parties suspended their efforts to comment and, subsequently, boycotted the Code of Conduct coordination meeting and the Code's announcement.  3. (U)  The Code prohibits criticism of the ideology and security of Pakistan and ridicule of the judiciary or the armed forces.  It calls on candidates to avoid corrupt practices, including bribing or intimidation of voters.  It bans deliberate dissemination of false and malicious information, speeches that promote sectarian and other violence, and interference with voter participation based on gender, ethnicity, caste or religion.  It prohibits: ministers from combining official visits and campaign activities; candidates from procuring the support or assistance of civil servants; and, the use of government funds to buy political advertising.  Upon protests from several parties, the ECP dropped proposed restrictions on spending by candidates.  4. (U) The Code requires parties to coordinate rallies 24 hours in advance with the police and establishes procedures to ensure rallies do not block traffic.   Except for voters, candidates and duly authorized election agents, no one without a valid pass issued by the ECP will have access to the polling booths.  The ECP does promise free access for foreign/domestic observers, who will be issued official passes.  The Code, however, has no apparent enforcement mechanisms.  MOI Supplement --------------  5. (U)  On November 27, the Ministry of Interior announced its own \"unofficial guidance\" on political rallies and processions.  Concerned over a repeat of the October 18 Karachi bombing when over 140 Pakistan People's Party supporters were killed at a rally to welcome Benazir Bhutto, MOI issued a statement saying it will provide security for all of the political leaders, including Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, during campaigning.  At his weekly press briefing, however, MOI Brigadier Cheema said the GOP was trying to strike a balance between protecting candidates and allowing necessary political activities and election preparations to go forward.  The MOI's rules include:  - Processions/rallies may be banned. - Organizers must get no-objection certificates (NOC) from their respective provincial governments to ensure proper security preparations. - Overall responsibility for security rests with administrations and local law enforcement agencies (LEAs), not with the private security of the political parties. - District administrations and LEAs must use electronic equipment for screening and frequency jammers for any authorized gatherings.  ISLAMABAD 00005178  002 OF 002   - Political parties and government officials should engage before events to develop an \"action agreement\" on how the parties will behave. - Political leaders should not expose themselves unnecessarily for long periods of time and all movement of political leadership should be well-coordinated, ensuring \"foolproof\" security. - Any violation of the code of conduct would be at the political parties' own risk  6. (C) Comment:  For months, opposition political parties had been calling upon the ECP to formulate a Code of Conduct that was negotiated by all stakeholders.  The ECP's last-minute and typically minimal attempt at coordination was undermined by the announcement of a state of emergency. The MOI's rules could easily be abused to limit oppositon activities, but the government is having to walk a fine line between protecting candidates from very real threats and enabling some semblance of normal campaigning.  Comments by officials from President Musharraf on down that the MOI rules will be strictly implemented are being interpreted by opposition parties as an infringement on their right to campaign freely, but the parties will be the first to blame the government for another bomb at a political rally.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/8/2007 7:59", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005192  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/07/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: GOP STEPS TOWARD NORMALIZATION  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  Pakistan's Attorney General outlined to Polcouns several steps in the GOP plan to restore constitutional normalcy.  The constitution will be fully restored and the state of emergency will be lifted on December 15; all judges will re-take an oath to uphold the constitution; political detainees will be released before December 15; and Geo TV could be back on the air in the next few days.  The AG claimed that the latest amendments to the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) had been devised to give Musharraf protection from treason charges.  The Embassy has been working behind the scenes with the lawyers' and human rights communities on ideas to restore some of the judiciary; the AG will propose a similar idea to return 5-6 of the deposed Supreme Court justices to the bench.  The Saudi Ambassador was allowed to visit former Chief Justice Chaudhry to offer a government-sponsored plan to support the reinstatement of other judges, but Chaudhry appears to have spurned the proposal.  If the government does convince other judges to return, this could give the lawyer's community enough of a victory to back off current protests and allow the courts to function normally again. End Summary.  2.  (C)  Polcouns met December 7 with Pakistan Attorney General Malik Qayyum, who outlined the GOP's plans to move toward legal normalcy.  Qayyum said he would recommend to President Musharraf that the constitution be fully restored on December 15, a day earlier than announced, because December 16 (the day Bangladesh declared its independence from Pakistan) would not be the best choice.  Detainees to be Released ------------------------  3.  (C)  According to Qayyum, all persons detained under the State of  Emergency, including Aitzaz Ahsan and other political activists would be released, probably even before December 15.  (Note: This week Ahsan issued a public call for all political candidates to promise to defend the judiciary; he suggested that all bar associations base their political support for candidates on these promises.  Although Ahsan is a Pakistan People's Party leader, Benazir Bhutto responded publicly that she did not support this proposal.)  Geo TV ------  4.  (C)  See also septel.  On the subject of Geo TV, Qayyum said he had counseled the Director of the Pakistan Electronic Media Authority (PEMRA) that its restrictions on Geo would not hold up in court.  The Sindh High Court had thrown out Geo's appeal, but the rejection was based on technical grounds that the Court had no jurisdiction during the State of Emergency.  Qayyum said he expected Geo to be fully back on the air in Pakistan within the next two-three days.  Restoring the Judiciary -----------------------  5.  (C)  Polcouns noted the USG had called for the release of all detained judges but had carefully refrained from demanding that the former Chief Justice be reinstated. Providing a copy of the American Bar Association's letter to President Musharraf, she said there was growing pressure to restore the judiciary.  The Embassy had been approached in the last few weeks from various members of the legal and human rights community about the need to find a way forward, and we wondered if the government had plans to address this problem.  Qayyum agreed there was a problem, saying that he had been trying to increase the number of Supreme Court judges from 11 to the full court of 17, but that there were not enough qualified candidates.  The decision (which Qayyum claims to have opposed) to also remove provincial high court judges had exacerbated the situation.  Qayyum claimed that the Supreme Court was working normally again but admitted that other courts were suffering due to continued lawyers' boycotts and the lack of experienced judges.  6.  (C)  Qayyum said he was going to suggest December 7 to Chief Justice Dogan the possibility of bringing back 5-6 members of the former Supreme Court to fill the current six  ISLAMABAD 00005192  002 OF 002   vacancies.  Five former judges had already approached the AG saying they would come back once the constitution was restored.  Because Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto had refused to back the restoration of the former Chief Justice, Qayyum predicted that these other judges and the lawyers could not continue to remain outside the system. The ideal time to bring the judges back, said Qayyum, would be on December 15 when all the judges will re-take an oath to the constitution (vs. to the President as was required under the November 3 PCO).  7.  (C)  Regarding pensions for the deposed judges, Qayyum confirmed press reports that the President would sign a decree ensuring that the deposed judges do receive a pension, even if they do not officially resign or retire.  There was a precedent for doing this when Musharraf granted pensions for the judges who refused to swear an oath to the President after the 1999 coup. Qayyum told the press December 7 that the benefits would include 80 percent of the salary of a judge as pension, 200 liters of gas for his private cars, a driver, medical facilities and a provision to set up a private office in his residence.  8.  (C)  Separately, on December 7, Saudi Ambassador Ali Awadh al-Asseri met deposed Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, who remains under house arrest in Islamabad.  According to press reports, al-Asseri delivered a message from the GOP that Chuadhry would be \"duly accommodated\" if he withdrew his demand for reinstating judges who had revised to take an oath under the PCO.  There is no indication Chaudhry accepted this offer.  In fact, according to press reports, Chaudhry politely rejected al-Asseri's invitation to perform the Hajj, saying that he was needed in Pakistan.  This is the first time the GOP has allowed any high-level visitors to meet with Chaudhry since November 3.  Immunity for Musharraf ----------------------  9.  (C)  Asked about Musharraf's need to have a two-thirds majority of the next National Assembly ratify the PCO, Qayyum proudly claimed that the latest amendment to the PCO had been drafted specifically to deal with this situation by making it another amendment to the constitution (270.AAA).  The Supreme Court had blessed the PCO, so to reverse this action, both the National Assembly and the Senate would have to vote by a two-thirds majority to change the constitution.  Even if the opposition controls the next National Assembly, the Senate is not up for election until 2009, so the President's supporters can block Senate action.  Elections Commission --------------------  10.  (C)  Qayyum said he recognized the need to fill the outstanding vacancies on the Election Commission and agreed that allowing the opposition to either name the new members or at least consult would be the best way to proceed.  He promised to look into when and how the additional Commission members could be named.  11.  (C)  Comment:  The GOP is working hard to restore the image of normality to Pakistan because Musharraf needs for the upcoming elections to be seen as legitimate.  The Embassy has been working behind the scenes with the human rights and lawyers' communities to find a way forward to get the judiciary functioning again.  Given Musharraf's personal animosity toward the former Chief Justice, his reinstatement is not going to happen.  But returning at least some of the other judges could give the lawyer's community enough of a victory to back off current protests and allow the courts to function normally again.  It is unclear whether the reinstatement of only some judges would satisfy Pakistan Muslim League-N leader Nawaz Sharif's demands for restoration of the judiciary.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/8/2007 8:05", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005193  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PHUM, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: GEO TV UPDATE   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The Sindh High Court denied on technical grounds Geo TV's petitions on December 4 to resume full broadcasting. Geo TV remains the only channel unable to air domestically.  Other news stations are allowed to broadcast because they have agreed to a Media Code of Conduct, which allows for government-censorship of material viewed as prejudicial to the government.  End summary.  Geo TV Petitions Denied -----------------------  2. (U) On December 4, the Sindh High Court in Karachi dismissed on technical grounds two petitions against the suspension of Geo television channel transmission. The Court claimed that under the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO), it had no jurisdiction over the case.  Separately (septel), the Attorney General told Polcouns that the Pakisan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA)'s action against Geo would not hold up in court after the PCO was lifted.  Media Code of Conduct ---------------------  3. (U) After the proclamation of emergency and the interruption of media services, PEMRA released a \"voluntary\" code of conduct for the Pakistani media outlets.  Formulated by the Pakistan Broadcasters Association, the code is aimed at \"self-regulation\" of electronic media and became a requirement for receiving the broadcasting license distributed by PEMRA.  In signing this code, the willing media outlets agree to a number of restraints on their broadcasting capabilities.  The code forbids airing any program deemed to contain material against the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Pakistan and its people, specifically the President, security and defense institutions, and the judiciary.  In a case of violation of the Code, PEMRA may issue a show cause notice to the violator as to why a particular program or the entire station is \"filtered\" from broadcast.  4. (U) According to reports from various station owners and editors, this code is being called \"voluntary;\" however, if the stations do not agree to the code, such as the case of Geo TV, they are prevented from broadcasting.  Given the economic impact of remaining off the air, many of these station owners agreed to the code simply to prevent bankruptcy, a fear also expressed by Geo station owners.  5. (U) In talks with Emboffs, Geo TV officials say that they have spoken with various Ministry officials and agree to monitor and edit programs in advance of airing; however, they refuse to fire three news anchors and announcers as requested by the GOP.  Without signing the code, Geo also volunteered to make concessions in their daily on-air reporting and editorials in local newspapers in an effort to show good faith to the GOP.  This \"self-censorship\" is seen by station officials as the station's only way of survival without fully committing to the strenuous code.  6. (C)  Comment:  With all other TV stations back on cable in Pakistan, it seems that the issue is not just controlling news broadcasts, because the GOP is blocking transmission of sports and entertainment programs that produce Geo's revenue.  This is punitive economic action that seems designed to drive Geo out of business.  The three targeted anchors/announcers were known to have criticized/satirized Musharraf himself, and Geo (the Pakistani equivalent of CNN) has over the last few months been particularly active in covering events--like the Red Mosque operation and former Chief Justice Chaudhry's rallies--that made the GOP uncomfortable.   The Attorney General reports that Geo will be back on the air in a few days, but what conditions Geo will accept to resume broadcasts remain unclear. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/10/2007 6:05", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005199  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  USDA FOR APHIS, FAS/OFSO/OSTA/OCRA AND FSIS CAIRO FOR APHIS/DR. LINDA LOGAN KABUL FOR USAID/DR. ROBERT SMITH NEW DELHI FOR AGMINSCOUNS/HIGGINS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: KFLU, TBIO, EAGR, AMGT, PK SUBJECT: ANOTHER OUTBREAK OF AVIAN INFLUENZA IN PAKISTAN   1. (SBU) Summary: Pakistani authorities reported an outbreak of avian influenza (AI) affecting 18,000 birds on a commercial poultry farm 50 kilometers north of Islamabad.  The Government of Pakistan (GOP) has confirmed four poultry outbreaks so far this season, with 81,000 birds dead or culled. There have been no confirmed cases of AI in humans. End Summary.  2. (U) Pakistan's National Reference Laboratory for Avian Influenza (NRLAI) confirmed on December 3 the presence of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza at a commercial poultry farm in Murree, 50 kilometers (35 miles) north of Islamabad.  The infection was confined to a single 35-day old breeder flock, 3,000 of which died before animal health authorities were notified.  Standard quarantine measures have been taken and the remaining 15,000 birds in the flock have been culled. The Government of Pakistan (GOP) is gathering relevant data and will report the case to the Office International Des Epizooties (OIE).  3. (U) The Murree outbreak is the fourth in the 2007-2008 migratory bird season. The first case occurred on October 26 on a commercial farm in Buttal, 150 kilometers (105 miles) to the north of Islamabad. 4,000 of the diseased 7-week old breeder flock died of H5N1 and 38,000 birds were culled.  Animal health authorities confirmed two additional infections on commercial farms in Abbottabad, also to the north of Islamabad, on November 1 and 20. A total of 21,000 birds were culled at both infection sites. Consequently, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock has urged all poultry farms to remain vigilant, improve sanitary conditions and report unusually high poultry mortality rates.  4. (SBU) Epidemiologists at the National Institute of Health reported to Foreign Agriculture Service (FAS) personnel in Islamabad that all recent suspected human AI cases tested negative.  There have been no recorded cases of AI in humans in Pakistan.  5. (SBU) Comment: More poultry outbreaks are expected as the season progresses, given the pattern of last year's outbreaks. Historically, the disease is first reported in the north of country, gradually spreading south to the provinces of Punjab and Sindh. Migratory bird patterns and poor sanitation conditions on commercial poultry farms continue to be the primary drivers of AI infection. The GOP has initiated a three-year, USD 19.6 million national program for the prevention and control of avian influenza.  However, a more intensive, sustained and widespread program is needed to effectively prevent and control the spread of the virus.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE164437", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/11/2007 9:43", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005226  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR EEB/ESC/TFS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ETTC, PTER, KTFN, PK SUBJECT: TERRORISM FINANCE COORDINATION OFFICERS FOR PAKISTAN  Ref: State 164437  The following individuals are the Terrorism Finance Coordination Officers (TFCO) for Pakistan as per reftel request:  Principal: Alex Whittington, Economic Officer Telephone: (92-51) 208-2667 Class: WhittingtonAE@state.sgov.gov Unclass: WhittingtonAE@state.gov  SIPDIS  Deputy: Caroline Dow, Economic Officer Telephone: (92-51) 208-2927 Class: DowC@state.sgov.gov Unclass: DowC@state.gov  SIPDIS  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07SECSTATE159386", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/11/2007 13:52", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005235  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, IS, UNGA SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: UNGA RESOLUTIONS WITH ANTI-ISRAEL BIAS  REF: SECSTATE 159386  On December 11, Poloff met with Mohammad Fawad Sher, the Deputy Director for UN and International Organizations at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), to receive a readout of the Pakistan vote on the UN General Assembly resolutions with anti-Israel bias.  Sher acknowledged our concerns (reftel points), but confirmed that Pakistan, as it has done in previous years, chose to vote in favor of the resolutions. As the delegation had observed and passed to Sher, the voting patterns on these resolutions had not changed appreciably. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/11/2007 14:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005237  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/11/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: NSA AZIZ PROPOSES STEPS TO IMPROVE ELECTIONS   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Ambassador and DCM called on National Security Advisor (NSA) Tariq Aziz December 11 to discuss the on-going political situation and upcoming elections. NSA Aziz said the Saudi Ambassador to Pakistan recently met with Nawaz Sharif, implying the Saudis had tried to encourage a rapprochement between Musharraf and Nawaz.  Aziz shared his views on the political prospects of the major parties. Ambassador and DCM raised the issue of filling vacant electoral commission (ECP) positions and replacing the Secretary of the ECP, to which Aziz responded positively.  SIPDIS Aziz also said the government was considering meeting Benazir Bhutto's demand of relieving nazims (akin to mayors) until elections are held. End summary.  2. (C) NSA Aziz opened by saying the Saudi Ambassador to Pakistan had recently been \"very active,\" implying he had tried in his much publicized meeting with Pakistan Muslim League (PML-N) leader Nawaz Sharif to encourage a rapprochement with Musharraf. Aziz ruled out this possibility, saying Sharif could not get over his personal animosity and need for retribution towards Musharraf. Aziz opined that none of the major political parties could win a simple majority in next month's election and smaller parties will be needed to form a government, particularly Fazlur Rehman's Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F). Aziz went on to say Sharif and the Chaudhry's understood this, but Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto still thinks she can win a simple majority of seats. Aziz said Bhutto would level charges of corruption and rigging when her party fails to win such a majority.  3. (C) Ambassador asked Aziz about the status of filling still-vacant ECP positions. Aziz responded the government had accepted two of the names Bhutto had put forward for these positions and was in the process of formalizing an agreement. When asked by the DCM what the government planned to do about the Secretary of the ECP, Aziz was non-committal. After DCM reiterated widespread concerns held by the international and NGO community on the Secretary's character, competence, and partiality, Aziz agreed it would probably make sense to replace him. Aziz said the perception of how the ECP runs the election is more important than the fact that the Chief Commissioner of the ECP would be distraught over a change in personnel so close to the election. Aziz firmly stated he would propose dismissing the Secretary to President Musharraf.  4. (C) Aziz then raised Bhutto's demand that nazims (local mayors) be removed from office for the remaining month before the election. Aziz surprised us by stating he thought Bhutto's proposal made sense and was possible. Aziz stressed here again that perception was everything and if taking such action would enhance the credibility of elections, it would be worth doing. Aziz indicated Musharraf could issue an ordinance under the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) suspending nazims through the election. Aziz strongly suggested the Ambassador raise such a recommendation to President Musharraf in their next meeting.  5. (C) Comment: The attempted Saudi intervention remains curious and inconclusive.  Like many of Aziz's previous recommendations the past few months, the steps to enhance the transparency of the electoral process are positive and welcome. Sadly, even if the government were to take such actions, we feel these steps are not likely to signal a change in domestic and international opinion regarding the government's handling of the election. Despite this, we will encourage all elements of the government to make these proposed changes. End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/13/2007 6:50", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005256  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ECON, EAGR, ELTN, ETRD, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN IMPOSES 35 PERCENT DUTY ON FLOUR EXPORTS   1. (U) This cable has been coordinated with Consulates Lahore and Peshawar.  2. (SBU) Summary: The Government of Pakistan (GOP) has imposed a 35 percent duty on the export of wheat products in an attempt to discourage exports, bolster domestic supplies and reduce the domestic price of flour.  Flour exports are destined almost exclusively for Afghanistan.  The GOP has been unable to bring down the domestic price of flour, prompting the move to restrict flour exports to Afghanistan, reported at 600,000 metric tons annually. End Summary.  3. (SBU) Federal Board of Revenue Chairman Yusuf explained to the Ambassador and Economic Counselor during a courtesy call December 7 that the 35 percent export duty was imposed because the cost of domestic flour is half that of imported flour, in part because of the GOP's domestic wheat support program.  As a result of the price differential, exports have increased, resulting in flour shortages and high prices in Pakistan, despite a bumper wheat crop. Yusuf explained that Pakistan is now importing one million metric tons of wheat at international prices to cover domestic shortages.  4. (SBU) The 35 percent duty went into effect immediately.  Domestic wheat prices have risen dramatically in recent months, increasing fifty percent in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) bordering Afghanistan.  Pakistan needs to produce over 23 million metric tons of wheat per year to be self sufficient.  Although the country produced a record 23.5 million metric tons of wheat in 2006, cross border trade and smuggling pushed Pakistan's wheat stockpile below the 23 million metric mark, prompting price increases.  Pakistan's wheat exports to Afghanistan have remained steady at around 600,000 metric tons annually.  5. (SBU) Provincial governments previously advocated central government intervention in the price of wheat flour.  Despite unsubstantiated reports of truck seizures along the border, Consulate Peshawar contacts report that trucks are currently crossing the Afghan-Pakistan border unimpeded and no ban on the export of wheat flour has been put into place.  The NWFP is dependent on wheat flour from the neighboring Punjab, Pakistan's most populous province.  While there is no restriction on the transportation of wheat flour between provinces, NWFP officials allege that Punjab provincial authorities are restricting the flow of wheat out of the province in an attempt to manipulate the flour supply.  Wheat flour delivery disruptions have been reported in NWFP markets.  6. (SBU) Comment: The duty imposition is largely seen as damage control exercise by the GOP. With general elections scheduled for January 8, governments -- both federal and provincial -- are eager to bring down the cost of basic commodities, including wheat flour. High food prices are frequently cited in polls as the middle and lower classes' primary concern.  While the imposition of the duty will have an effect on the volume of wheat that is traded to Afghanistan via official channels, cross border smuggling will undoubtedly increase, fueled by increased demand and profits.  End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE149662", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/13/2007 11:20", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005262  SIPDIS  CORRECTED COPY - CAPTION REMOVED  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: ELAB, EIND, ETRD, PHUM, SOCI, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR  REF: STATE 149662  ISLAMABAD 00005262  001.2 OF 003   1. Summary: The Government of Pakistan (GOP) continues to pursue a national strategy for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor.  A legal framework exists barring children from hazardous labor, and Pakistan has ratified all eight of the International Labor Organization (ILO) core conventions.  Resource constraints and a lack of labor inspections, coupled with an inadequate primary education system and pervasive rural poverty, continue to hamper the GOP's efforts to fully eliminate all forms of child labor.  End Summary.  CURRENT LAWS AND REGULATIONS ----------------------------  2. The 1973 Constitution of Pakistan prohibits the employment of children under 14 in factories, mines or hazardous industries as well as all forms of forced labor.  The 1991 Employment of Children Act also prohibits employment of children under 14 and regulates children's working hours, forbidding overtime and night work.  The GOP amended the act in 2005, increasing the number of processes banned to child labor from 29 to 34, including carpet weaving, cement production, cloth dyeing and glass bangle fabrication. Forced labor and the exploitation of children are prohibited under the 1992 Bonded Labor System Abolition Act and the 2002 Prevention and Control of Human Trafficking Ordinance. Pakistan ratified the ILO Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, or ILO Convention 182, in 2001.  The GOP has ratified all eight core ILO labor conventions.   3. Children under the age of 14 may work in occupations outside of those listed in the Amendment to the Employment of Children Act but are subject to provincially-mandated universal education requirements and are protected by occupational health and safety guidelines.  There is no national education requirement in Pakistan; the Constitution allows each province and territory to independently legislate education requirements.  All four provinces of Pakistan - Sindh, Punjab, Balochistan and the Northwest Frontier Province - have compulsory primary education laws.  The Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) does not have a compulsory education requirement.  Enforcement of these laws is limited due to resource constraints and varies dramatically by province.  Access to the education system is also hampered by a dearth of schools in many remote rural areas.  COMPREHENSIVE POLICY --------------------  4. Pakistan has made significant progress in raising awareness about the problem of child labor.  In efforts to remove children from the work place and rehabilitate them, the GOP has undertaken programs individually and in conjunction with international donors and NGO partners.  While the GOP does not allocate separate federal budget funds specifically for the elimination of child labor, it has established a fund for the education and rehabilitation of freed child and bonded laborers.  5. In 2000, Pakistan enacted a National Policy Plan of Action (NPPA) on child labor, consisting of three components:  the withdrawal of children from hazardous professions; the rehabilitation of child workers; and the prohibition and eventual elimination of all forms of child labor.  The GOP's long-term strategy includes alternate education opportunities, guaranteed access to primary education and vocational skills training. The government's Poverty Alleviation Strategy also provides families of child laborers with preferential access to micro-credit loans, thus reducing the financial burden of taking a family wage earner out of the labor market.  The GOP has established a National Training Bureau at the federal level and vocational education centers at the provincial level.  According to the Ministry of Labor, primary school drop-out rates have declined from 15 percent in 2001 to 10 percent in 2005 since the implementation of these policies.  6. Pakistani Bait-ul-Mal, the government agency responsible for collecting and distributing the government-levied \"zakat\" (Islamic charitable giving required by the Koran) operates 151 centers nation-wide to educate working children and rehabilitate freed bonded laborers.  Bait-ul-Mal provides free food and educational materials as well as stipends to working children.  After receiving basic education, former child laborers are integrated back into the formal education system.  Since 1995, Bait-ul-Mal has spent over USD ten million on these projects.  Currently, more than 5,000 children are enrolled in education centers and over 5,000 have been reintegrated into the formal education system.  7. The benchmark 1996 National Child Labor Survey, conducted with technical assistance from the ILO, found that 8.3 percent of  ISLAMABAD 00005262  002.2 OF 003   children aged 5 to 14 were employed, 73 percent of them male.  71 percent of Pakistan's child laborers were concentrated in the agricultural, fisheries, construction and manufacturing industries. There has not been a follow-up survey.  According to the Ministry of Labor, nearly all of Pakistan's child labor occurs in informal, family-based or cottage industries.  In non-agricultural sectors, 93 percent of working children are engaged in informal activities. Children's contribution to work in rural areas is around eight times greater than in urban areas.  The survey also indicated that only one-fourth of all child laborers had any formal education.  8. The GOP, in conjunction with the ILO, has been planning to update the 1996 national survey of child labor for several years. The reluctance of international donors to commit funding for the project decreases the likelihood that a comprehensive national child labor survey will be conducted in 2008.  ILO representatives expressed a desire to build a child labor survey into the next national census, scheduled to begin in October 2008.  This survey would focus on district, not provincial, child labor trends, and would collect industry-specific information.  While Ministry of Labor officials are reluctant to speculate on the outcomes of any future survey, they hope increasing primary school enrollment rates are an indication that child labor is on the decline.  9. The ILO's International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) provides technical and financial support to GOP agencies for capacity building.  IPEC funded sector-specific initiatives have successfully targeted child laborers the in carpet, soccer ball, surgical instrument and domestic industries.  The U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) has provided USD 15 million for ILO-IPEC projects since 1997.  DOL currently funds the ILO-IPEC \"Time-Bound Program on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor,\" a child labor-focused program in the earthquake affecting regions and \"Mitigating Child Labor through Education in Pakistan.\"  This education project, scheduled to last through 2009, funds project sites in Balochistan, the Northwest Frontier Province and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.  The limited survey conducted in 2006 in association with the project indicates that 65 percent of working children belong to lower income groups and the average income per child is approximately Rs. 1,800 (USD 30) per month, a significant portion of family income.  The survey identifies poverty and the lack of access to the educational system as the two main reasons that children enter the workforce instead of attending school.  IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT -------------------------------  10. The protection of children falls under the purview of the Ministry of Labor and Manpower and the Ministry of Social Welfare. The GOP formulated a National Labor Inspection Policy in 2006, supporting an extension of labor inspection activities to the informal sector.  The Policy encourages the involvement of the private sector in the provision of labor inspection services through licensing and accreditation arrangements.  Several private sector-led labor inspection organizations currently operate in export-oriented sectors.  One such organization, the Independent Monitoring Association for Child Labor (IMAC), monitors child labor conditions in the sporting goods industry. The association is funded by its soccer ball manufacturer members.  11. However, enforcement of child labor laws remains weak due to inadequate resources devoted to labor condition monitoring. Provincial Labor Departments are required to carry out labor inspections but do not have inspectors devoted specifically to child labor.  Child labor complaints are adjudicated through separate labor courts. Workers can directly lodge complaints with these courts regarding working conditions and grievances.  Issues related to industrial relations are heard by the National Industrial Commission.  Child Labor violators can be fined up to Rs. 20,000 (USD 333) and/or receive up to one year in prison.  To date, most punishments have been limited to small fines.  12. Since 2003, labor inspections have been heavily regulated in the provinces of Punjab, Sindh and the Northwest Frontier Province. Inspection teams must request permission from provincial chief labor inspectors prior to visiting factories.  Local businesses are informed in advance of impeding inspections, limiting the effectiveness of the labor condition monitoring.  The Ministry of Labor has not received inspection reports from the three provinces since the regulations were put into effect in 2003.  External child labor monitoring mechanisms in the export-oriented soccer ball, surgical instrument, leather tanning, and carpet weaving industries have been introduced with ILO support in Pakistan.  External monitoring entities maintain public records of companies found using child labor that are shared with law enforcement agencies and potential foreign and domestic investors and consumers.  ISLAMABAD 00005262  003.2 OF 003    13. GOP information on the current state of labor inspections in Pakistan is incomplete.  The Ministry of Labor reports that the federal government has not received information on provincial labor inspections in 2007.  Data from previous years indicates that inspections are on the decline, particularly in the Punjab.  COMMENT -------  14. The GOP has worked actively with international organizations and NGOs to reduce the incidence of child labor in Pakistan.  A comprehensive legal framework and action plan are in place for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor but enforcement is lacking.  Ministry of Labor officials report that while the federal government is dedicated to curtailing the employment of children, in some instances, district-level governments have yet to get the message.  Additionally, the government's ability to significantly reduce child labor continues to be constrained by a lack of funding and an inadequate primary education system, particularly in rural areas.  The biggest impediment to combating the worst forms of child labor remains economic as persistent poverty drives families to send their children into the workforce.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/13/2007 12:48", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005263  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, IS, UNGA, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN VOTES FOR ISRAELI-SPONSORED UN RESOLUTION  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary. We welcome Pakistan's December 11 UNGA vote in favor of an Israeli-sponsored resolution; however, the MFA was quick to stress privately and publicly that the vote was a reflection of Pakistan's support for the content of the resolution and should in no way be interpreted as a policy shift on the Arab-Israeli conflict.  End Summary.  2. (U) After Pakistan voted December 11 for an Israeli-sponsored resolution on agriculture technology and development, post contacted the MFA to express our appreciation.  Fawad Sher, the MFA Deputy Director for UN and International Organizations told poloff that the reason Pakistan voted for this resolution was because it was development-based and did not involve the Arab-Israeli conflict or related politics.  4. (U) Supporting Sher's position, MFA spokesman, Mohammad Sadiq, commented to local media December 12 that this vote for agriculture development does not change Pakistan's policy on Israel.  In reference to the vote, Sadiq noted, \"Nobody should try to read something between the lines because nothing substantial has changed.\"  4. (C) Comment:  Although we welcome the vote, we caution that it should not be viewed as a shift in Pakistan's attitude toward the Arab-Israeli conflict.  We expect Musharraf himself will continue to support the kind of quiet diplomacy that was brokered by Turkey when the Pakistani and Israeli foreign ministers met in 2005.  However, President Musharraf's Pakistan Muslim League party issued this week its party manifesto, which on foreign policy follows the standard Islamic line--support for the establishment of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.  End comment. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4369|07ISLAMABAD4817", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/14/2007 4:56", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005266  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2017 TAGS: PINR, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: FIXING COALITION SUPPORT FUNDING  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4817      B. ISLAMABAD 4369  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) This is an action request, see Para 12.  2. (C)  SUMMARY.  Since 2002, the USG has reimbursed Pakistan over 5.3 billion USD for support to U.S. operations using Coalition Support Funds (CSF).  When pending claims are processed, that figure will likely exceed 5.6 billion USD. The CSF authorizing legislation was written soon after 9/11; six years down the road, we need Pakistan to more vigorously engage in the war on terror, but CSF is not working the way it should.  CSF is not reaching those parts of the GoP that are shouldering the load in GWOT operations.  Two clear examples of the problem are helicopter readiness and medical support to the Frontier Corps.  The readiness of Pakistan's helicopter fleet is poor.  Despite giving the GoP 55 USD million for helicopter operations over seven months, only 2 to 6 Pakistani Cobras are fully mission capable at a time they desperately need air power to fight spreading militancy.  Additionally, we have processed or will process reimbursement requests for 100 million USD over the year to support medical operations, but the Frontier Corps still does not receive basic medevac support.  Another consequence of the current system is political.  It fuels the internal argument that the USG is \"paying\" Pakistan to fight a U.S. war - this at a time when the Pakistanis need to accept the direct threat to their own security and sovereignty posed by al-Qaida, Taliban and extremist forces.  3.  (C)  Post has worked extensively with the GoP to increase GoP transparency and accountability.  What we have discovered is that we are receiving reimbursement requests for barbed wire and air defense radar systems that have no or marginal impact on the GWOT.  We recognize the legal and political sensitivities involved in developing a new approach, but the program, as it is currently being implemented, simply is not meeting U.S. or Pakistan counter-terrorism objectives.  This message outlines several ways forward.  In the meantime, DOD or CENTCOM should undertake an audit or program review of CSF.  END SUMMARY.  TARGETING CSF FUNDING TOWARD PAKISTAN AND U.S. STRATEGIC GOALS  4. (C) U.S. Public Law 109-289 (2206) authorizes CSF to reimburse Pakistan for logistical, military and other support provided to U.S. military operations.  Under this authorization, the U.S. has reimbursed Pakistan 5.3 billion USD since 2002.  When pending claims are processed, the total CSF reimbursement to Pakistan will exceed 5.6 billion USD. Pakistan receives nearly 90 percent of total CSF worldwide. While the December 8, 2003 guidance provided by the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) on parameters for reimbursements is broad, there have been multiple instances in which Post is confident funds have been diverted and that reimbursed claims figures have been seriously inflated.  A few examples:  -- HELICOPTER READINESS.  Pakistan received 55 million USD for helicopter operations from July 2006 to February 2007; however, Post estimates that as few as 3 Cobra Helicopters were fully mission capable as recently as 10 weeks ago.  Post is confident Army Aviation Command never received the 55 million.  -- MEDEVAC ASSISTANCE TO FRONTIER CORPS.  The Pakistan Army claimed 99 million USD over past 12 months for medical operations and the U.S. has paid or is in process of paying all/all submitted medical claims.   Yet, despite providing this plus fully funding 235 million USD CSF lease assistance for 26 new Bell 412 helicopters, the Inspector General of the Frontier Corps has repeatedly requested U.S. assistance in providing assets for medevac, obviously unaware of the resources the U.S. has provided.  --RADAR MAINTENANCE:  Between August 2006 and July 2007, Pakistan submitted claims for almost 70 million USD in ADA Radar Maintenance, although there is no enemy air threat related to the war on terror.  --BARBED WIRE:  Between August 2006 and July 2007, we  ISLAMABAD 00005266  002 OF 002   received a claim for 26 million USD in barbed wire and pickets.  While these items are no doubt helpful in protecting outposts, the claim figures are highly suspect.  5. (C)  Ambassador, the Office of Defense Representative and DOD officials have repeatedly raised CSF disbursement and other problems with the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and key military officials but have not received satisfactory responses.  In fact, recent correspondence from Pakistan leadership argues for additional funding to support increased operations.  6. (C) CSF reimbursement funds go directly into Pakistan,s general treasury -- from there we have no visibility on their final destination or application.  And we are not alone - based on our conversations with GoP officials, from President Musharraf down to the average Pakistani private, no one in Pakistan seems to have a clear grasp of the amount of US military reimbursement assistance actually provided.  7.  (C)  The CSF authorization legislation was drafted soon after 9/11.  Six years down the road, we still need Pakistan to engage more vigorously in the fight against extremism, but it is clear we also need to do a better job of making sure our monies are targeted to meet our counter-terrorism objectives.  POTENTIAL APPROACHES TO CSF REFORM  8. (C) Potential options to address CSF issues include the following:  (1) Stop approving Pakistan's CSF reimbursement requests until we receive adequate assurances on disbursement; (2) Earmark CSF monies for specific areas: maintenance, support, etc.; (3) Create a CSF \"trust fund\" that would allow the USG to control reimbursement and to obligate some funds for specific needs; or (4) Convert CSF into a direct cash transfer program.  9.  (C)  Option 1 would lead to a major political clash and damage our military to military relationship, just as we have the potential for greater cooperation under Chief of Army Staff General Kayani's leadership.  This would undermine the very purpose of CSF--to encourage the GoP to continue fighting militant extremism.  The Taliban, al Qaida and Islamic extremists represent a clear and growing danger to U.S. and Pakistani security and to regional stability.  As allies with forces in the region, we have a responsibility to strengthen and focus our assistance to improve their security forces' capabilities.  10.  (C) We understand DOD has determined Options 2, 3 and 4 would require asking Congress to amend the authorizing legislation.  Post could attempt to persuade Pakistan to concur with establishment of some form of \"trust\" mechanism - pointing out the alternative may be a severe reduction or loss of funding if Congress continues to see insufficient transparency and accountability.  In any event, a new approach is urgently required. We believe some variation of Options 3 and 4, which allow the USG to earmark at least some CSF monies for those Pakistani military elements of vital interest to us (helicopters, special forces and Frontier Corps), is the most logical and efficient approach.  CSF AUDIT/PROGRAM REVIEW  11. (C) Post repeats that we do not have visibility over the destination of CSF funds.  Accordingly, Post would welcome an audit or program review of the CSF process by CENTCOM or by DOD.  ACTION REQUEST  12.  (C)  Action Request:  Post would appreciate a front-channel response to the options proposed in para 8 and the proposal for an audit/review. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/14/2007 5:03", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005267  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: GOP URGES U.S. TO BACK OFF PUBLIC CRITICISM   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  On December 5, MFA convoked Polcouns and the Ministry of Information convoked Press Attach to complain about public statements by in-country Mission officials. MFA's Acting Director of Americas Sohail Mahmood told Polcouns that our consuls general were making \"inappropriate\" \"political\" statements to the press following meetings with opposition politicians.  The MFA had no problem with our meeting with opposition figures, but urged that we stop making press comments that were seen as unnecessarily provocative.  (Note, Foreign Minister Khan made a similar appeal to Ambassador in November.)  2.  (C)  On the same day, Ministry of Information External Publicity Wing DG Mansour Suhail convoked Press Attach to express concern over recent statements by Embassy officials on media restrictions.  He specifically mentioned statements the Press Attach made about the urgency of restoring full media freedom after her visit to Power99 FM radio, which had been off the air and all its equipment confiscated since the declaration of the state of emergency on November 3. Suhail, without providing specific charges, said repeatedly that the radio/TV stations that had been taken off the air had \"violated the laws of Pakistan.\"  He added that it was not appropriate for foreign diplomats to comment on these subjects.  3. (C)  Both Mahmood and Suhail defended the GOP's recent actions under the state of emergency as necessary and noted President Musharraf's efforts to develop free media in Pakistan.  Mahmood repeated Musharraf's public urging that the West recognize that Pakistan needs time to develop fully as a democracy.  4. (C)  The GOP then released a press statement admonishing both the U.S. and EU delegations for talking to the press after meeting with opposition candidates.  5.  (C)  Comment:  Mission is continuing to express publicly USG policy to promote free and fair elections and urge the GOP to lift the state of emergency, free all political detainees, and restore media freedoms.  We view these \"warnings\" as part of the ongoing political campaign, in which there has been heightened sensitivity to perceived western and Saudi influence in the political process.  We suspect the warnings also reflect President Musharraf's annoyance that we continue to press on restoring media freedom.  PATTERSON PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/14/2007 10:14", "classification" : "SECRET", "body" : "S E C R E T ISLAMABAD 005283  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: ATTEMPTED INTERCEPTS OF COALITION AIRCRAFT  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (S) SUMMARY.  On December 11, the Pakistani Air Force (PAF) Liaison Officer (LNO) to the Office of the Defense Representative (ODRP) told the ODRP Air Cell that PAF aircraft had launched to intercept a Coalition aircraft that had crossed the Afghanistan-Pakistan border via the standard Coalition air corridor.  The aircraft was clearly a Coalition airplane.  General Helmly has sent a stiff letter to the Chairman JCS and the head of the Air Force and requested an urgent meeting.  This action could have resulted in serious consequences, so Post is raising the issue with Pakistan senior military leadership.  This is the second incident of this type.  END SUMMARY.  2. (S) At 0602Z on December 11, the Pakistan military detected an aircraft within the established (\"the boulevard\") airspace that serves as the flight corridor for Coalition forces through Pakistani airspace.  (Approximately 150 Coalition aircraft traverse the \"the boulevard\" each day.) The aircraft entered Pakistan's airspace from Afghanistan per established procedures, but its transponder code (or \"squawking\") failed to identify it as one of those scheduled to cross the border.  Meanwhile, the U.S. CENTCOM Air Cell located at Post was working to establish the identity of the specific aircraft.  3. (S) Shortly after 0700Z the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) Liaison Officer (LNO) reported that Pakistani fighters were scrambling to intercept the aircraft.  A few minutes later PAF was notified that the plane had been positively identified by the Air Cell.  The PAF LNO now says the interceptors never launched.  4. (S) We are reporting this because it is not the first incident where the PAF has launched or prepared to launch interceptors against what were clearly Coalition aircraft, but which were not previously identified on an air tasking order or were squawking an incorrect code.  Such incidents have the potential to result in a serious international incident.  Scrambling armed fighters to intercept armed or support Coalition aircraft creates an unnecessarily dangerous situation.  Any aircraft entering from Afghanistan can safely be presumed to be a Coalition asset as the airspace is monitored and controlled by ISAF.  5. (S)  The US CENTCOM Air Cell located at Post is also following up with appropriate ISAF elements to address the fact that the aircraft in question was not adhering to all established procedures for flying the corridor.  However, the pilot's failure to squawk the correct code only led to difficulty in identifying the exact aircraft - multiple other indicators identified it as Coalition aircraft, especially by flying within the Pakistan prescribed and approved corridor, squawking in the clear, and demonstrating no aggressive or threatening posture.  6. (S) We are engaging with GoP to address this issue.  ODRP Chief has drafted a message stressing our concerns and citing the dangers of such intercepts to Pakistan's Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff Tariq Majeed and Air Chief Marshall Tanvir, and will raise in meetings as appropriate. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4369|07ISLAMABAD4817|07ISLAMABAD5266", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/15/2007 5:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005288  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2017 TAGS: PINR, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY:  PAKISTAN: FIXING COALITION SUPPORT FUNDING  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5266 ISLAMABAD 4817      B. ISLAMABAD 4369  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) This is an action request, see Para 12.  This is a retransmission correcting text in Paragraph 10 of Ref A. Please refer only to this version of the cable.  2. (C)  SUMMARY.  Since 2002, the USG has reimbursed Pakistan over 5.3 billion USD for support to U.S. operations using Coalition Support Funds (CSF).  When pending claims are processed, that figure will likely exceed 5.6 billion USD. The CSF authorizing legislation was written soon after 9/11; six years down the road, we need Pakistan to more vigorously engage in the war on terror, but CSF is not working the way it should.  CSF is not reaching those parts of the GoP that are shouldering the load in GWOT operations.  Two clear examples of the problem are helicopter readiness and medical support to the Frontier Corps.  The readiness of Pakistan's helicopter fleet is poor.  Despite giving the GoP 55 USD million for helicopter operations over seven months, only 2 to 6 Pakistani Cobras are fully mission capable at a time they desperately need air power to fight spreading militancy.  Additionally, we have processed or will process reimbursement requests for 100 million USD over the year to support medical operations, but the Frontier Corps still does not receive basic medevac support.  Another consequence of the current system is political.  It fuels the internal argument that the USG is \"paying\" Pakistan to fight a U.S. war - this at a time when the Pakistanis need to accept the direct threat to their own security and sovereignty posed by al-Qaida, Taliban and extremist forces.  3.  (C)  Post has worked extensively with the GoP to increase GoP transparency and accountability.  What we have discovered is that we are receiving reimbursement requests for barbed wire and air defense radar systems that have no or marginal impact on the GWOT.  We recognize the legal and political sensitivities involved in developing a new approach, but the program, as it is currently being implemented, simply is not meeting U.S. or Pakistan counter-terrorism objectives.  This message outlines several ways forward.  In the meantime, DOD or CENTCOM should undertake an audit or program review of CSF.  END SUMMARY.  TARGETING CSF FUNDING TOWARD PAKISTAN AND U.S. STRATEGIC GOALS  4. (C) U.S. Public Law 109-289 (2206) authorizes CSF to reimburse Pakistan for logistical, military and other support provided to U.S. military operations.  Under this authorization, the U.S. has reimbursed Pakistan 5.3 billion USD since 2002.  When pending claims are processed, the total CSF reimbursement to Pakistan will exceed 5.6 billion USD. Pakistan receives nearly 90 percent of total CSF worldwide. While the December 8, 2003 guidance provided by the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) on parameters for reimbursements is broad, there have been multiple instances in which Post is confident funds have been diverted and that reimbursed claims figures have been seriously inflated.  A few examples:  -- HELICOPTER READINESS.  Pakistan received 55 million USD for helicopter operations from July 2006 to February 2007; however, Post estimates that as few as 3 Cobra Helicopters were fully mission capable as recently as 10 weeks ago.  Post is confident Army Aviation Command never received the 55 million.  -- MEDEVAC ASSISTANCE TO FRONTIER CORPS.  The Pakistan Army claimed 99 million USD over past 12 months for medical operations and the U.S. has paid or is in process of paying all/all submitted medical claims.   Yet, despite providing this plus fully funding 235 million USD CSF lease assistance for 26 new Bell 412 helicopters, the Inspector General of the Frontier Corps has repeatedly requested U.S. assistance in providing assets for medevac, obviously unaware of the resources the U.S. has provided.  --RADAR MAINTENANCE:  Between August 2006 and July 2007, Pakistan submitted claims for almost 70 million USD in ADA Radar Maintenance, although there is no enemy air threat  ISLAMABAD 00005288  002 OF 002   related to the war on terror.  --BARBED WIRE:  Between August 2006 and July 2007, we received a claim for 26 million USD in barbed wire and pickets.  While these items are no doubt helpful in protecting outposts, the claim figures are highly suspect.  5. (C)  Ambassador, the Office of Defense Representative and DOD officials have repeatedly raised CSF disbursement and other problems with the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and key military officials but have not received satisfactory responses.  In fact, recent correspondence from Pakistan leadership argues for additional funding to support increased operations.  6. (C) CSF reimbursement funds go directly into Pakistan,s general treasury -- from there we have no visibility on their final destination or application.  And we are not alone - based on our conversations with GoP officials, from President Musharraf down to the average Pakistani private, no one in Pakistan seems to have a clear grasp of the amount of US military reimbursement assistance actually provided.  7.  (C)  The CSF authorization legislation was drafted soon after 9/11.  Six years down the road, we still need Pakistan to engage more vigorously in the fight against extremism, but it is clear we also need to do a better job of making sure our monies are targeted to meet our counter-terrorism objectives.  POTENTIAL APPROACHES TO CSF REFORM  8. (C) Potential options to address CSF issues include the following:  (1) Stop approving Pakistan's CSF reimbursement requests until we receive adequate assurances on disbursement; (2) Earmark CSF monies for specific areas: maintenance, support, etc.; (3) Create a CSF \"trust fund\" that would allow the USG to control reimbursement and to obligate some funds for specific needs; or (4) Convert CSF into a direct cash transfer program.  9.  (C)  Option 1 would lead to a major political clash and damage our military to military relationship, just as we have the potential for greater cooperation under Chief of Army Staff General Kayani's leadership.  This would undermine the very purpose of CSF--to encourage the GoP to continue fighting militant extremism.  The Taliban, al Qaida and Islamic extremists represent a clear and growing danger to U.S. and Pakistani security and to regional stability.  As allies with forces in the region, we have a responsibility to strengthen and focus our assistance to improve their security forces' capabilities.  10.  (C) We understand DOD has determined Options 2, 3 and 4 would require asking Congress to amend the authorizing legislation.  Post could attempt to persuade Pakistan to concur with establishment of some form of \"trust\" mechanism - pointing out the alternative may be a severe reduction or loss of funding if Congress continues to see insufficient transparency and accountability.  In any event, a new approach is urgently required. We believe some variation of Options 2 and 3, which allow the USG to earmark at least some CSF monies for those Pakistani military elements of vital interest to us (helicopters, special forces and Frontier Corps), is the most logical and efficient approach.  CSF AUDIT/PROGRAM REVIEW  11. (C) Post repeats that we do not have visibility over the destination of CSF funds.  Accordingly, Post would welcome an audit or program review of the CSF process by CENTCOM or by DOD.  ACTION REQUEST  12.  (C)  Action Request:  Post would appreciate a front-channel response to the options proposed in para 8 and the proposal for an audit/review. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4990|07ISLAMABAD5192", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/15/2007 9:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005289  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: STATE OF EMERGENCY LIFTED  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4990      B. ISLAMABAD 5192  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Summary:  As promised, President Musharraf has lifted the State of Emergency (SOE) and restored the constitution; he addresses the nation at 2000 local tonight.  The January 8 general elections can now proceed under an established legal framework.  However, the effects of the SOE linger on in the form of continued curbs on the media (Geo TV is still off the air) and restrictions on political gatherings.  The deposed judges and key politicians such as Aitzaz Ahsan remain under house arrest.  Musharraf also issued an order amending the National Command Authority to ensure that he, as President, will control Pakistan's nuclear weapons.  The Attorney General claims that this week's amendments to the constitution provide Musharraf with immunity for his recent actions, but it is possible that the next government will revisit the legality of the SOE, the Provisional Constitutional Order and the firing of Supreme and High Court judges.  Thus, the election results will continue to be critical in determining Musharraf's future and Pakistan's uneven progress towards democracy.  End summary.  New Orders -----------  2. (U) On December 15, President Musharraf lifted the state of emergency, which he imposed late November 3 in his capacity as (then) Chief of Army Staff.  Pakistan's Attorney General Malik Qayyum announced that the new orders included the concurrent Repeal of the November 3 State of Emergency (SOE), Provisional Constitution Order (PCO) and Revival of Constitutional Order.  Musharraf is scheduled to address the nation at (local) 2000 hours.  3. (SBU) Before giving up his unfettered powers, however, Musharraf introduced six more amendments to Pakistan's constitution.  Two of these new amendments are in response to the opposition's previous legal challenges to Musharraf's re-election.  The first amendment sanctions Musharraf's October 6 re-election before the National Assembly whose term expired on November 15. The opposition had argued in court that Musharraf could only be elected by the newly elected National Assembly.  The second amendment makes clear that Musharraf's new five-year term will count as his second (not third) time in office; again, the opposition had claimed in court that Musharraf had already served two terms and was therefore ineligible to serve a third term.  4. (C) The other four amendments are directly related to Pakistan's judiciary: (1) reiterating the establishment of an Islamabad High Court; (2) related details on appointments to the new Islamabad bench; (3) lowering the minimum age requirement from 45 to 40 for High Court judges; and (4) confirming all new judicial appointments made under the PCO. Judges who have ceased to hold office because they did not take an oath to the PCO will receive a pension and other benefits available to other judges.  Creating another court in Islamabad would relieve pressure on a crowded high court docket in Rawalpindi and allow the government to control the appointment of another high court justice.  The Attorney General admitted the government was having trouble filling the positions of deposed justices; lowering the age limit will make that process easier.  The deposed justices had argued that lifting the PCO would restore them to the bench, but amendment (4) makes clear that they have been definitively removed.  5. (C)  Those judges who took office after having taken an oath to the PCO have now re-taken an oath, this time to the constitution.  On December 10, Musharraf added three more judges to the Supreme Court, raising the total number of justices on the reconstituted bench to 14.  Justices Mian Hamid Farooq and Syed Sakhi Hussain Bokhari have been brought up from the Lahore High Court.  Justice Syed Zawwar Hussain Jaffrey was brought out of retirement from the Sindh High Court.  Under precedence, the Supreme Court has contained 17 justices, so more judges may be added.   ISLAMABAD 00005289  002 OF 002   Immunity for Musharraf ----------------------  6.  (C)  As noted in Ref A, the Attorney General has claimed that constitutional amendments promulgated on November 21 ensure that President Musharraf will not have to seek a two-thirds parliamentary ratification of his extra-constitutional actions on and since November 3.  Fundamental Rights Restored? ----------------------------  7. (C) According to public and private statements by Qayyum, Musharraf's orders would restore all constitutionally-protected \"fundamental rights\" and that all remaining political detainees would be released.  Former Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi told CG Lahore that Aitzaz Ahsan would be released from house arrest December 15, but this has not yet occurred.  The deposed Supreme Court justices, including former Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, remain confined under house arrest \"to ensure the maintenance of public order.\"  8.  (U)  Despite lifting of the SOE, Geo TV remains off the air.  Nuclear Powers Asserted -----------------------  9. (C)  On December 14, Musharraf used his extra-constitutional powers to strengthen his powers as President to control Pakistan's nuclear weapons.  He issued an ordinance providing a legal mandate for the National Command Authority (NCA) and ensuring that the President commands the NCA.  The NCA was established in 2000 to provide a series of controls over Pakistan's special (nuclear) weapons programs.  The NCA as created includes an Employment Control Committee and a Development Control Committee, both chaired by the head of government (technically, the Prime Minister although Musharraf has been acting in that capacity within the NCA).  The Special Programs Division (SPD), headed by a military general, acts as the NCA's secretariat and implements the policies established by the NCA.  Musharraf's new ordinance gives the head of state (President) the chairmanship of both committees.  10. (C) Comment:  The good news is that Musharraf has followed through on his promise to lift the SOE and restore the constitution.  Musharraf and his party now hope that elections which will take place under the established legal framework can be considered credible.  The effects of the SOE linger on, however, in the form of continued repression of the media and limits imposed on political gatherings. Depending on the election results, the next government could revisit the legality of the SOE, the PCO and Musharraf's decision to replace Supreme and High Court judges. Musharraf's decision to ensure he as President retains control of Pakistan's nuclear weapons could set up a confrontation with the next Prime Minister over defense and foreign policy, but the nukes have always been, and remain, under the control of the Pakistan Army. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/18/2007 2:05", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005302  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: KFLU, TBIO, EAGR, AMGT, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN CONFIRMS FIRST CASES OF AVIAN INFLUENZA IN HUMANS   1. (SBU) Summary: The Pakistan National Institute of Health (NIH) confirmed on December 15 that six individuals have tested positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza (AI).  One of the confirmed AI patients died in hospital.  This marks the first reported cases of AI in humans in Pakistan.  World Health Organization (WHO) representatives are currently on the ground along with a Centers for Disease Control (CDC) medical epidemiologist.   A team from the Cairo-based U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU-3) is expected in country shortly.  End Summary.  2. (U) The text of the Ministry of Health press release is as follows:  Press Release: Ministry of Health Taking Necessary Action for the Control of Avian Influenza Outbreak in NWFP.  Islamabad, 15 December 2007: The National Institute of Health under the auspices of the Ministry of Health has tested patients and contacts suspected for Avian Influenza in late October, 2007.  Six cases were found positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza virus, five of them from Abbottabad and one from Mansehra district.  Five of them have fully recovered.  One of the confirmed cases died in hospital, while his brother who could not be tested has also died.  To avert the potential spread of this infection to humans, the Ministry of Health has implemented the following control activities:  -Investigation and sampling of case and contacts, and the organization of active surveillance for the early detection of infection. -Ensuring standard treatment to all detected cases and contacts. -Identification of isolation wards/rooms in all referral hospitals in the area and the nomination of focal persons to ensure proper case management and early notification of suspected cases. -Ensuring an early stock piling of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to ensure the necessary protection of health providers. -Ensuring a preliminary stock of osaltamivir for prophylaxis and treatment.  The Ministry of Health is undertaking these effective interventions in close collaboration with the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, the Health Department of the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), WHO and UNICEF.  The Ministry of Health will maintain this measure to ensure the health and well-being of the population and avert the threat from avian influenza in Pakistan.  3. (SBU) A team of three WHO epidemiologists, two from WHO headquarters in Geneva one from the WHO's Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, is currently in Islamabad.  The team is reviewing data from all confirmed and suspected cases and will monitor infection control measures at hospitals in Peshawar and Abbottabad, the sites of patient infection and hospitalization.  A medical epidemiologist from the influenza division of the CDC is currently in Islamabad and will work with the WHO team. Following a direct WHO request, a team from the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU-3) is en route from Cairo to assist in data collection and confirmation.  The team is scheduled to arrive in Islamabad on December 18.  Post continues to monitor the situation and will coordinate with the WHO and NAMRU-3 teams.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5160", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/18/2007 10:25", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005305  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS: PREPARATION AND MONITORING  REF: ISLAMABAD 5160  1.  (SBU)  Summary.  December 15 was the last day for candidates to withdraw or change political parties in the run-up to Pakistan's January 8 parliamentary elections.  All the major parties will contest the election and are now heavily engaged in campaigning.  USG- and international donor-sponsored election preparation programs are winding down and observer/monitoring missions are moving into place. The U.S. Mission will field 31 observer teams and is coordinating with the UK, Canada and (hopefully) Japan to expand our reach.  We plan to include our expected congressional delegations into our observer teams.  Post is forwarding party allegations of vote rigging to the professionals in the IRI monitoring team.  We do not expect a clear winner on election day; it could take weeks for the parties to form a coalition government and choose a new prime minister.  This will mean an extended period of protracted uncertainty.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU)  This is one of a series of upcoming reports on the January 8 National Assembly and Provincial Assembly elections in Pakistan.  We will be providing in the next few weeks primers on the major political parties, profile bios of potential prime ministers, and continuing analyses of what is expected to be a close race among the major political parties.  At this point, it appears no single party will be able to form the next government in Pakistan.  The game will be coalition building among rival and often contentious parties and leaders.  Because it is unlikely there will be a clear winner, it could take weeks after the election for the parties to form a government and choose a new prime minister.  This will mean an extended period of protracted uncertainty.  3.  (SBU)  December 15 was the last day that candidates could withdraw or switch parties, so the final analysis of prospects for electoral districts is underway by all the political parties.  Overall, the Election Commission has approved 7,335 candidates for national and provincial assembly seats.  Only a handful of the smaller parties, including Qazi Hussain's Jamaat-e-Islami and Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek Insaaf decided in the end to boycott.  The big three -- Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party, Pervaiz Elahi's Pakistan Muslim League, and Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-N -- as well as Altaf Hussain's Muttahida Quami Movement and Fazlur Rehman's Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, are all now campaigning in earnest.  There will be a lull for the Eid holiday (December 20-22) and Mohammad Ali Jinnah's birthday (December 25); the biggest campaign push will take place in the last week before the January 8 elections.  According to law, the last day for campaigning is January 6.  Election Day Preparation/Planning ---------------------------------  4.  (SBU)  USG- and international donor-sponsored elections preparation programs are winding down.  The Asia Foundation is completing its voter education programs.  IFES and a USAID-funded contractor are completing work on placing the voter list on DVDs for distribution to the parties and on the Election Commission's website.  All of the 430,000 transparent ballot boxes purchased by the USG and Japan have been delivered to the Election Commission for dissemination across the country.  IRI distributed its latest pre-election poll to the political parties last week. The United Nations Development Program has already published and distributed comprehensive guide books for polling/returning officers and continues to train polling officials through December 31. NDI is finishing its political parties' poll watcher training.  5.  (SBU)  IRI is fielding its long-term monitors in seven hubs around the country; by election day, IRI will have 65 monitors on the ground.  IRI will be producing, within 48 hours after the polls close, an initial assessment of whether the elections were credible.  The EC has finally decided to go forward with its monitoring team of 50 long-term and possibly 30 short-term monitors. The Asia Foundation is in the process of accrediting up to 20,000 domestic observers.   ISLAMABAD 00005305  002 OF 002   6.  (SBU)  The U.S. Mission is fielding 31 election observer teams throughout the country.  We are coordinating with the UK (15 teams), the Canadians (20 teams) and (hopefully) the Japanese (6 teams).  We will establish a control center in the Embassy to coordinate mission observer teams and provide Washington with field updates on how election day activities are progressing.  The U.S. Mission is for observation and fraud prevention only; we will not/not be issuing any public statements on the credibility of the elections.  7.  (SBU)  As of now, we are expecting three congressional delegations and one staff delegation on election day.  We plan to include the delegations in our planned election observation missions in Islamabad, Peshawar, Lahore/Punjab, and (security permitting) Quetta.  Press Coverage --------------  8.  (SBU)  The GOP has announced it will establish a media election village near the Associated Press of Pakistan headquarters in Islambad.  Reportedly this will be a state of the art facility where journalists can file stories and receive their Election Commission accreditation to cover election reporting.  We expect significant numbers of U.S. and other international press.  9.  (SBU)  Although we expect the media gradually to ramp up to its pre-State of Emergency criticism of all politicians, the code of conduct that has been imposed on the media is creating self-censorship by both print and electronic media journalists.  Geo TV remains off the air.  Vote Rigging Allegations ------------------------  10.  (SBU)  Led by the Pakistan People's Party, virtually all the opposition parties are publicly complaining about vote rigging by the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party. Accusations include alleged bribing by the intelligence services, illegal transfers of judges who will monitor election returns, continued distribution of political spoils by district nazims (mayors), and reports of intimidation of opposition party workers by police and security services. Parties have complained the Election Commission is not responding.  11.  (SBU)  Post is forwarding reports of alleged abuses to the professional monitors in IRI for their assessment and inclusion in their election reports.  Restrictions on Campaigning/Voting ----------------------------------  12.  (SBU)  While most detained opposition political party workers have been freed, Aitzaz Ahsan and several of the deposed Supreme and High Court judges remain under house arrest.  The Election Commission's code of conduct for parties, coupled with the Ministry of Interior's own restrictions on large political gatherings (reftel), has so far restricted the ability of parties to hold big rallies. On the positive side, there have been no more suicide bombings of political rallies since the death of over 140 Pakistan People's Party workers in Karachi on October 18.  13.  (SBU)  It is still unclear the extent to which security concerns will prevent elections from taking place in Swat, Tank (Northwest Frontier Province) and several agencies (North and South Waziristan at the very least) in the Federally Administered Tribal Area.       PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/20/2007 7:31", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005328  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN FACES FISCAL PROBLEMS DUE TO SWELLING DEFICIT  Summary -------  1.  (SBU) Summary:  High international oil and food prices and political unwillingness to decrease or eliminate subsidies in an election year are contributing to a projected increase in Pakistan's fiscal deficit from 4 to 4.9 percent for FY2008.  GOP expenditures on energy and food subsidies have risen over 100% since the July 1 beginning of the fiscal year. The biggest contributor is oil; prices at the pump have not increased since January 2007, while the international price of oil has increased over 50 percent.  The caretaker government has little power to take this issue on; the next government will find its options limited by a growing fiscal deficit.  If delays in making payments to the oil marketing companies continue, Pakistan may also have problems attracting future investments in oil and gas sector.  End summary.  Oil Subsidies -------------  2.  The last increase in gasoline prices was in January 2007, when international oil prices hovered around $55 per barrel.  In an election year, the GOP has made a deliberate decision to absorb the price differential.  The caretaker government (in power for approximately two months) has also taken a pass on resolving the problem, despite Ministry of Finance pleas to take action now. Pakistan's Finance Minister, Salman Shah has acknowledged publicly that fiscal deficit will rise significantly if this increase is not passed on. The Ministry of Finance has already revised its fiscal deficit projection to 4.6 % of GDP and believe that it may rise further to 4.9 % in a few months.  3.  (SBU)  In FY 2007-2008 the GOP budgeted $245 million in subsidies for the oil  marketing companies (OMCs) and refineries, projecting oil prices at $55 per barrel. With international oil prices now above $90 a barrel, the cumulative margin between market and pump prices cost the GOP approximately $473 million through November 2007. The GOP has already made payments of $213 million to the OMCs, but another $360 million is still outstanding. Chevron Pakistan alone is owed $53 million.  The Embassy has taken up Chevron's case with the Ministry of Finance so that the company can receive payment prior to the end of its fiscal year December 31. Chevron has put an anticipated $15 million investment on hold. (Note:  Chevron does not have any exploration activities in Pakistan, only downstream investments.  End note.)  Power Subsidies -------------------  4.  (SBU) The GOP budgeted $406 million in subsidies for the power sector in the FY 2007-08. Subsidies paid by October 2007 amounted to $246 million for the Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) and $62 million the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation (KESC). Ministry of Water and Power contacts told Econoffs that total subsidies by the end of the fiscal year expected to total $950 million, 133% higher than budgeted. The Ministry of Water and Power has asked the Federal Government to make arrangements for additional funds.  Wheat Subsidies ----------------  5. (SBU)  According to the Finance Ministry, the GOP placed nearly a million metric tons (mmt) in international wheat orders worth $450 million in November and December at an average cost of $450 per mmt, compared to domestic average price of $220 per mmt. The expected final cost to the government is approximately $250 million. The government continues to subsidize imported wheat to keep food inflation under control.  With food price inflation running over 10 percent annually, bread and butter issues remain the top concern in the minds of Pakistani voters.  Funding the deficit -------------------  6.  (SBU)  The Finance Ministry sources said that fiscal deficit stood at 1.6 percent of GDP versus the target of 0.9 percent for the first quarter (July-September 2007) of the current fiscal year, making it impossible to meet the overall fiscal year goal of four percent.  The oil and power subsidies were the major factors causing fiscal deficit to surpass the first quarter target. The full year fiscal deficit target of 4 percent of GDP is unlikely to be achieved  ISLAMABAD 00005328  002 OF 002   due to actual subsidies for oil and power exceeding planned and budgeted ones. The GOP's FY2007-08 budget assumed that oil prices would be $55 per barrel.  With crude oil prices ranging between $90 and $100 per barrel, the government is paying out energy subsidies of $230 million every month.  The caretaker economic team is very concerned, but not finding much GOP support for substantial price increases.  7. (SBU) The State Bank unsuccessfully tried to limit GOP's Central Bank borrowing, but could not stop the government from borrowing $2 billion from July through November 24, well in excess of the annual $704 million target. Excessive Central Bank borrowing is not only increasing inflationary pressures, but is also eroding the State Bank's financial position.  Comment --------  8.  (SBU) Comment:  The GOP should have been phasing in gasoline and power price increases throughout 2007, but could not find the political will.  The caretaker government, in power for only two months, is unlikely to make unpopular decisions affecting food or fuel prices ahead of the January elections.  As a result, the new government will face some tough choices -- either perpetuate the current subsidy regime with the negative budgetary and macroeconomic implications or spend some of its political capital to rein in subsidy spending.   Until now, Pakistan has had a good reputation for macroeconomic management, which has contributed significantly to its attractiveness as a destination for foreign capital.  It is not yet clear what economic policies a new government will pursue; most party election manifestos are long on fiscally untenable promises. The USG will need to stay engaged in close consultation with the GOP on economic policies.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE149648", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/20/2007 12:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005336  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: PARM, PREL, MNUC, EFIN, KTFN, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON FATF STATEMENT AND GUIDANCE ON IRAN  REF: STATE 149648  1. (SBU) On December 10, Econ Off informed officials at the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Americas Section of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) statement on Iran.  Officials at both ministries pledged that the USG points will be conveyed to relevant agencies of the Government of Pakistan (GOP). Ministry of Finance officials requested copies of FATF public statements regarding Iran, which Econ Off provided.  Ministry of Finance officials pledged to review the situation with the State Bank of Pakistan.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5302", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 2:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005349  SIPDIS   E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/21/2017 TAGS: KFLU, TBIO, EAGR, AMGT, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: INDEPENDENT TESTING CONFIRMS ONE HUMAN FATALITY OF AVIAN INFLUENZA, OTHERS CASES IN DOUBT  REF: ISLAMABAD 5302  Classified by: Ambassador Patterson for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)   1. (C) Summary: Independent testing conducted by microbiologists from the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU3) confirms that one individual who died from respiratory failure tested positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza (AI). NAMRU is unable to obtain viable samples from two other cases, of which one was a fatality. All other suspected cases have tested negative for AI.  Pakistani health authorities had previously announced that six individuals, out of eight suspected cases, had tested positive for avian influenza.  There is not a consensus among Pakistani and international health experts as to whether or not human-to-human transmission of the virus has occurred.  End Summary.  2. (SBU) The Pakistan National Institute of Health (NIH) publicly stated on December 15 that six individuals tested positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza (AI). Included in the six was one fatality, Pakistan's first confirmed human case of AI (Reftel).  The World Health Organization (WHO) announced on December 15 that Pakistan had informed the WHO of eight suspected cases.  3. (SBU) Investigation of the outbreak focused on nine individuals. The first, also known as the Index case, was hospitalized in Peshawar with flu-like symptoms in late October 2007.  He had been involved in the culling of diseased chickens in a poultry farm near Abbottabad, north of Islamabad.  The patient recovered and was discharged. Pakistani health authorities reported that he tested positive for an H5 influenza strain.  Three of his brothers, all of whom had close contact with the index patient during his illness, were hospitalized with respiratory ailments in November.  The first brother died on November 19 and was not tested prior to his burial.  The second brother died on November 28 and tested positive for H5N1.  A third brother reportedly tested positive for AI but recovered and was released from the hospital. Pakistani health authorities also reported that a doctor who cared for the brothers, as well as a male cousin of the diseased, both tested positive for the virus.  Active surveillance of chicken farms around the site of the October culling indicated three additional individuals suffering from flu-like symptoms, all of whom suffered mild symptoms are reportedly tested positive for the virus.  4. (SBU) A team of three WHO epidemiologists, two from WHO headquarters in Geneva and one from the WHO's Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, traveled to Islamabad to assist the Pakistani National Institute of Health in investigating the cases.  A medical epidemiologist from the influenza division of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), coincidently in Islamabad at the time of the outbreak, also joined the team.  Following a direct WHO request, a Cairo-based team from the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU3) arrived in Pakistan on December 20 to re-test all available samples.  5. (C) NAMRU 3 researchers reported to EconOff that H5N1 was confirmed in one of the cases, the second brother of the index patient, who died of respiratory failure on November 28.  NAMRU was unable to test viable samples from the index case or the November 19 fatality.  Samples from all other suspected cases tested negative for H5N1 avian influenza.  A WHO-collaborating lab in London also retested the samples and confirmed NAMRU 3 findings on December 25. Samples are being forwarded to the NAMRU 3 lab in Cairo for full genetic sequencing.  Neither the WHO nor NAMRU will release this data until the Pakistan Ministry of Health announces the test results.  As of December 26, the Government of Pakistan has not released a statement on the WHO/NAMRU findings.  6. (C) Comment: NAMRU microbiologists report that there is no consensus among the NIH and WHO as to whether human-to-human transmission occurred in this instance.  According to the NAMRU team, there is no scientific evidence to indicate that the virus was transmitted between individuals.  However, according to the NAMRU team, the one confirmed AI fatality did not have prolonged contact with diseased poultry and may have been infected by his brother, the index case.  Without viable samples from the index case or the November 19 fatality, it will be difficult for health officials to ascertain whether or not limited human-to-human transmission of the virus occurred.  Local and international health experts currently on the ground in Pakistan agree that there have been no new recent cases.  According to health authorities, the outbreak seems to have been limited and did not spread to neighboring poultry farms, nor did it spread directly from family to family. Post remains in contact with all relevant parties and will report any new findings or public statements on the case. End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07KARACHI728", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 14:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005358  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SITREP 1: BHUTTO KILLED BY RALLY BOMB BLAST  REF: KARACHI 728  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) At about 1800 hours (local) December 27, Benazir Bhutto suffered fatal injuries while departing a campaign rally outside of Rawalpindi.  Initial reports from the scene stated a suicide bomber, carrying four kilos of explosives, approached Bhutto's vehicle as she was getting in to depart. Bhutto was rushed to Rawalpindi General Hospital, where she was declared dead within minutes after arrival, possibly while in surgery.  As many as 20 other PPP supporters were killed and 42 injured.  2. (C) Comment: It is unclear how the public, especially PPP supporters, will react, but there are early reports of sporadic street violence in Lahore and Rawalpindi, cars being burned and posters torn down.  Embassy and Consulates will hold immediate EAC meetings at 2000 hours (local).  The British High Commission has decided to close its Karachi mission tomorrow (December 28).  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5358", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 17:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005359  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SITREP 2: BHUTTO, FAMILY TO LARKHANA; MUSHARRAF ADDRESSES NATION; DEMONSTRATIONS CONTINUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 5358  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Bhutto's December 27 assassination caused immediate reactions throughout Pakistan: Musharraf addressed the nation calling for calm, while PPP supporters spontaneously rallied, causing damage to cars and select buildings.  Bhutto's body will likely be moved to Larkhana (Bhutto's ancestral home) tonight, and Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari should arrive in Karachi from Dubai very soon. CoDel Specter will tentatively depart early (tomorrow morning); other Codels are encouraged to postpone travel to Post.  End summary.  2. (U) Rawalpindi General Hospital confirmed that Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto was fatally injured by a bullet wound to her neck.  3. (U) Musharraf addressed the nation at about 2100 hours (local) to offer his public condolences for the Bhutto loss. He asked for calm across the country and vowed that the terrorists behind the assassination would be brought to justice, saying \"Terrorists pose the greatest threat to Pakistan.\"  4. (U) Following an emergency cabinet meeting, the GOP declared three days of mourning.  The PPP is calling for 40 days of mourning (through February 5).  5. (U) Spontaneous demonstrations, including sporadic violence and arson, by PPP supporters have broken out throughout the country.  Large groups have gathered in Lahore (in front of the Press Club, near CG Lahore), Peshawar, Karachi, Quetta and Sialkot.  Cars and some buildings (banks, a police station, Pakistan Muslim League (PML-Q) party offices) have been smashed and set on fire.  6. (U) Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, and one of the Bhutto daughters is en route to Karachi from Dubai and are expected to arrive before morning.  Bhutto's body may be moved to Larkhana (Sindh), the Bhutto family's ancestral home, tonight.  7. (C) CODEL Specter (Senator Arlen Specter, Congressman Patrick Kennedy) will cut short their visit, tentatively departing December 28 morning.  Senator Specter, Congressman Kennedy and Ambassador laid a condolence wreath at the PPP's Central Secretariat Headquarters in Islamabad.  Codel Voinovich, expected to arrive December 30, has been advised to postpone their trip.  8. (SBU) Embassy held an EAC meeting at 2000 hours (local) (septel). PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 19:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005361  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: CODEL SPECTER'S MEETING WITH PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  In a December 27 meeting with Codel Specter, President Musharraf outlined ongoing Pakistani efforts to fight extremism, expressed support for increased IMET funding, and defended his decision to impose a state of emergency.  Senator Specter pressed for Pakistan to capture Usama bin Laden; Specter and Congressman Kennedy expressed concern about the continued detention of judges and the importance of an independent judiciary and free and fair elections.  End summary.  2.  (C)  Senator Arlen Specter, Congressman Patrick Kennedy, Ambassador and Polcouns (notetaker) met December 27 with President Musharraf in his Islamabad residence.  Musharraf was accompanied by General Shafkat and his new Private Secretary Mohsin Hafeez.  SIPDIS  3. (C)  Senator Specter opened the meeting by noting the U.S. values the close bilateral relationship with Pakistan and appreciates Islamabad's support in the war on terror.  He asked the President if he knew where Usama bin Laden as hiding.  4.  (C)  Congressman Kennedy noted that the recent conditions attached to U.S. military assistance should be seen only as a means to ensure that our funding is going where it needs to go--to help the Pakistani military fight the war on terror. The U.S. fully recognized that Pakistan has lost over 1,000 troops to extremists and we wanted to ensure transparency in funding so that the military could better do its job. Kennedy expressed strong support for the IMET program to build military relationships and promote democracy.  He also said that many in the U.S. were concerned that the Pakistani elections would be rigged and asked how Musharraf planned to ease the transition to the new government.  5.  (C)  Musharraf expressed satisfaction that the bilateral relationship was now broader and more long-term than it had been in the past.  There had been an unfortunate gap in IMET support during the Pressler amendment years but now \"the sky is the limit\" on how we should expand the program to improve military training and capabilities.  Saying that conditions \"do not go well here,\" Musharraf expressed concern that conditions placed on U.S. aid were seen in Pakistan as a lack of U.S. trust.  6.  (C)  Reimbursements for costs on the war on terror (note: Coalition Support Funds) were analyzed and mutually agreed; there could be no question that the funds were getting to the military.  Citing a previous concern about maintenance of the Pakistani Cobra helicopter fleet, Musharraf said that several months ago only one of 20 Cobras was operational.  This was a serious problem as Pakistan needed these Cobras to fight air/ground operations against terrorists.  The problem, he said, was that Pakistan was not as well organized about maintenance as they should have been, but it was not an issue of the money not going where it was intended.  Musharraf said the Army now has taken action to correct the problem.  7.  (C)  On terrorism, Musharraf said that Pakistan was fighting al Qaeda and the Taliban, both in the tribal border areas and now into the settled areas of the country.  They were suffering from a growing number of suicide bombings as well, and they traced the source of almost all these bombings to militant leader Baitallah Mehsud in Waziristan.  Mehsud was providing training and logistical support for terrorists in Pakistan and across the border into Afghanistan.  The Army had been engaging in tough action in Swat.  Specter asked about bin Laden, and Musharraf replied that he could be in Bajaur Agency (in the Federally Administered Tribal Area), where government forces currently could not operate. Musharraf mused that if operations in Swat could be wrapped up, the Army might move to North and South Waziristan to eliminate Mehsud and then go on to Bajaur.  There were approximately 100,000 troops in the area now; this was the result of shifting two divisions from the northern border. They were raising 12 wings of the Frontier Corps which should be equipped and ready to fight by December 31.  But the Army was increasingly overstretched so the plans would take time to implement.  8.  (C)  Leading into a discussion of the state of emergency,  ISLAMABAD 00005361  002 OF 002   Specter said that all people in public life were subject to both fame and ridicule, and he recognized that Pakistan was not the U.S.  But imposing a state of emergency, arresting judges, restricting the media, and keeping the Chief Justice under house arrest were events that caused concern in the U.S.  Our Supreme Court tells our President things he doesn't want to hear.  An independent media and judiciary were important for democracy.  9.  (C)  Musharraf agreed that, technically, a free media and judiciary were important for a democracy.  But Pakistan was not as stable as the U.S.  If the choice was between disintegration and democracy, the integrity of the state had to come first.  The Chief Justice was corrupt, he engaged in nepotism, and he interfered in cases for personal reasons. Then he went further and interfered on issues affecting the country and the economy, preventing privatization in one case from moving forward.  Musharraf said he began hearing appeals from the Prime Minister, the police and other government officials asking to put a stop to the Chief Justice's politically motivated actions.  At first, Musharraf said he made a blunder by not acting out of concern over criticism on human rights grounds.  But eventually Musharraf filed a case of misconduct, as is legally outlined, with the Supreme Judicial Council and suspended the Chief Justice.  Instead of allowing the Council to rule on the matter, the Supreme Court reinstated former Chief Justice Chaudhry, in violation of the procedures outlined in the Constitution.  10.  (C)  Musharraf stated that he imposed a state of emergency because the government was almost paralyzed, the law enforcement community was demoralized and the Court was letting terrorist go free.  The Court had ordered the re-opening of the Red Mosque in Islamabad after the Army had been forced to launch a military operation to shut down terrorist activities there.  The economy was suffering due to the Court's actions.  Then the Court challenged the will of the National Assembly when it voted to re-elect Musharraf. The Court began hearing cases into Musharraf's eligibility for re-election and the issue became increasingly politicized.  The first bench was composed of seven judges; when it became clear to the Chief Justice that the verdict would support Musharraf, the bench was extended to nine and eventually eleven judges.  Musharraf said before imposing the state of emergency he consulted with the military, the business community and the cabinet; all agreed the Chief Justice had to be stopped.  Musharraf said his staff was preparing a full explanation in response to a letter he had received from the American Bar Association.  11.  (C)  Kennedy asked about the remaining detainees, and Musharraf said there were only a few still under house arrest.  Yes, Musharraf volunteered, this included Aitzaz Ahsan, who had been released only to immediately start organizing lawyers' protests again; this was not acceptable, so Ahsan was re-arrested.  12.  (C)  Musharraf had another event at attend, but he closed the meeting by saying that his priority issues were fighting terrorism, maintaining economic growth and encouraging democracy.  Democracy was the only way forward for the future and Pakistan must have free and fair elections.  13.  (U)  Codel Specter did not have an opportunity to clear this message.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 19:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005362  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, SNAR, PTER SUBJECT: CODEL SPECTER MEETS WITH AFGHAN PRESIDENT HAMID KARZAI  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b)  1. (C) Summary: Codel Specter had an impromptu meeting with visiting Afghan President Hamid Karzai December 27 in Islamabad.  Karzai was extremely courteous and thanked Senator Specter and Representative Kennedy for continued USG assistance to Afghanistan.  Karzai described his December 26 meeting with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf as \"positive,\" and expressed his hope that \"Pakistan-Afghanistan ties will improve in the months to come.\"  Notably, Karzai did not avail himself of the opportunity to lambast either Pakistan or Musharraf to this visiting Codel.  End summary.  USG Assistance --------------  2. (C) Visiting U.S. Senator Arlen Specter and U.S. Congressman Patrick Kennedy, accompanied by DCM, met December 27 in Islamabad with Afghan President Hamid Karzai.  Karzai had just concluded his own meetings with the GOP.  3. (C) Karzai opened the meeting with effusive praise for USG assistance to his country.  He pointed out that Afghanistan had come a long way since 2001 and will continue to progress with USG help.  The CoDel reacted positively to Karzai's comments.  They inquired into which types of projects worked best and whether additional USG assistance would be required.  Karzai specifically cited USG-sponsored road construction as having led to enhanced economic activity in his country and increased wealth for his citizenry in general.  Counterterrorism Cooperation ----------------------------  4. (C) Turning to a question on the effectiveness of joint counterterrorism initiatives in the region, Karzai responded that his December 26 meeting with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf was \"extremely positive.\"  He added that Pakistan-Afghanistan relations \"had entered a new era.\"  5. (C) Karzai further explained that Pakistan had begun to suffer the effects of Talibanization, which would prompt it to cooperate more fully with Afghanistan.  In his view, however, \"the Taliban posed no long-term strategic threat to Afghanistan, but successfully thwarting the Taliban would require greater, sustained Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation.\"  Karzai concluded, \"This will now happen.\"  6. (C) Asked for suggestions on how best to defeat the Taliban, Karzai noted that the group did not enjoy popular support in Afghanistan.  Repeating an earlier point, Karzai stressed that economic development in his country would defeat the Taliban.  Karzai made a special effort to provide the CoDel with a positive assessment of Afghanistan's economic conditions, claiming that wealth was indeed being created.  He emphasized that defeating the Taliban would require \"time and Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation.\"  7. (C) Responding to a specific question about the multilateral effort to capture Osama bin Laden, Karzai expressed confidence at its eventuality.  Karzai quickly noted that bin Laden's continued freedom was not for lack of a concerted effort by all involved parties.  He also pointed out that Coalition forces had been close numerous times in capturing bin Laden.  Counternarcotics Efforts ------------------------  8. (C) In response to Representative Kennedy's question on domestic drug use in Afghanistan, Karzai professed that his government recognized the domestic drug use problem as a national issue.  It had recently been discussed in a cabinet meeting, claimed Karzai.  He estimated that as many as 100,000 Afghanis were users of illicit drugs.  He felt the problem was actually getting worse, exacerbated by Afghani refugees recently returned from Iran.  9. (C) Karzai responded warmly to Representative Kennedy's suggestion that he invite to Afghanistan a bipartisan Congressional delegation specifically to discuss the drug use problem as a national and international issue.   ISLAMABAD 00005362  002 OF 002   Engaging Iran -------------  10. (C) Turning to Senator Specter's question on how best to deal with Iran's nuclear aspirations, Karzai insisted that more dialogue was needed.  Karzai added, \"confrontation will not work.\"  Instead, the USG (and international community) must find ways to engage Iran.  Karzai explained that the acquisition of nuclear weapons for a country in this region was much more than a strategic issue, it bolsters national pride as well as creating a sense of safety regarding national security.  11. (C) Senator Specter asked for Karzai's views on how best to encourage Iran to engage in a dialogue with the U.S. Karzai responded that it would be hard but that we should remember that the Iranian population was not anti-U.S. by nature.  Senator Specter then proposed a possible \"parliamentary exchange\" between the U.S. and Iran to promote engagement with Iran.  12. (C) Comment: While we will wait to see what, if any, positive and proactive steps either side actually takes to enhance the level of cooperation between the two governments, we are cautiously encouraged by the fact that President Karzai did not use this private meeting to lambast either Pakistan or President Musharraf personally to a captive Congressional audience.  End comment.  13. (U) This cable has not been cleared by Codel Specter.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5359", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 11:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005380  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, ASEC, CASC, PINR, KFLO, MARR, AMGT SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 3: BHUTTO'S FUNERAL; PROTESTS EXPECTED AFTER PRAYERS  REF: ISLAMABAD 5359  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The GOP transported the body of slain Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto to Larkana, where funeral services are taking place as of 1430 hours December 28.  Violent sporadic protests occurred throughout the country well into the night of December 27. Pakistan was relatively quiet the morning of December 28, but violence and demonstrations, particularly in Karachi and other areas of Sindh, resumed after Friday afternoon prayers.  Caretaker Interior Minister Nawaz said there would be no new state of emergency declared; Punjab's Caretaker Chief Minister has appointed two separate committees to investigate the Rawalpindi attack.  Caretaker Prime Minister Soomro announced that elections would be held as scheduled on January 8, but Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-N party has declared it will boycott.  Post is appealing the decision of the International Republican Institute's board to cancel its elections monitoring mission because of security concerns.  The European Commission's observation mission may follow suit on December 31.  All mission personnel are safe and accounted for.  End summary.  Funeral -------  2. (U) The GOP provided a C-130 and helicopters to transport the body of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto from Rawalpindi to her home in Larkana (Sindh). Bhutto's funeral is taking place as of 1430 hours (local) December 28.  PPP members on the scene and live TV coverage reported general chaos as grief-stricken mourners surrounded the house, grounds and family mausoleum.  3. (C) Security and logistical concerns prevented the Ambassador from attending the funeral.  The Ambassador plans to travel to Larkana as soon as possible to convey condolences to the family.  No Emergency/Investigation --------------------------  4. (U) Caretaker Interior Minister Hamid Nawaz said publicly that \"there is no possibility of imposition of emergency again in the country.\"  Meanwhile, Punjab provincial Caretaker Chief Minister Ejaz Nisar appointed two committees to investigate Bhutto's assassination: one led by a Lahore High Court justice and the other led by the province's Additional Inspector General of the Criminal Investigation Department.  All media are reporting that al Qaeda has claimed responsibility for the attack.  5. (C) The Ambassador called Chief of Army Staff General Kayani to urge the GOP to provide the maximum security possible for the Bhutto family.  Protests --------  6. (SBU) Throughout the night of December 27, PPP supporters across the country conducted spontaneous violent demonstrations, burning select government buildings, banks and shops, as well as transportation links and vehicles. Pakistan's cities were relatively quiet the morning of December 28 as the GOP had declared a three-day mourning period and government offices, shops, banks and the stock exchange were closed.  However, more demonstrations are expected after Friday afternoon prayers.  The Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) parties have called for a general strike nationwide.  7. (C) CG Karachi reports continued looting in some Karachi neighborhoods (including near the consulate) and protests by funeral mobs in Larkana.  The Pakistan Army has been called out in Karachi, Hyderabad, Sukkur and Larkana.  At least six people have been killed; the Sindh Rangers have been given permission to shoot to kill to control mobs.  The Indus  ISLAMABAD 00005380  002 OF 002   Highway between Hyderabad and Larkana has been blocked at several places by mobs.  Karachi Airport is closed except for international flights by foreign-flag carriers.  A \"wheel-jam\" strike has been called for Sindh province; this means mobs will prevent any vehicles from moving in areas where the strike is being observed.  Eighteen Toyota trucks purchased by State/INL for the Frontier Corps were destroyed when the train carrying them was attacked near Larkana.  8. (C) CG Peshawar reports angry demonstrations in several parts of Peshawar, including around the old city, and in Dera Ismail Khan district.  Crowds have set fire to the offices of the ruling PML and MQM parties.  9. (C) CG Lahore reports isolated, small demonstrations in various parts of the city.  Elections ---------  10. (C)  Caretaker Prime Minister Soomro announced elections will be held as scheduled on January 8.  Nawaz Sharif announced that his Pakistan Muslim League-N party will boycott the elections.  Contrary to some press reports, ruling coalition partner Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) in-country leader Farooq Sattar stressed December 28 that his party had not yet decided whether to boycott the elections.  11. (C) The International Republican Institute's (IRI) Pakistan office reported to Post that its Washington-based board of directors has decided to withdraw from country their 22 long-term observers and will cancel the full 65-person election observer mission.  Their primary concern was security.  Post has appealed this decision, arguing that the security situation should be evaluated over and after the next three days of mourning.  12. (C) The European Commission's Chief Election Observer met with EU countries' chiefs of mission December 28 morning, when the U.K., the Netherlands, Sweden and France were able to postpone a decision on canceling the observation mission until December 31.  Some European countries may now be advocating a delay of the January 8 general elections.  13. (C) CG Lahore met with Pakistan Muslim League leader Pervez Elahi, Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz leader Shahbaz Sharif, and Supreme Court Bar Association President Aitzaz Ahsan (septels) to urge that elections proceed as scheduled with full participation of the parties.  Other -----  14. (U) The Karachi Stock Exchange closed today.  It, along with all banks and most other businesses throughout Sindh, will remain closed (\"shuttered down\") until December 31. MarketWatch reported that Standard & Poor's Ratings Services announced that Pakistan's sovereign credit ratings could be lowered \"if the assassination of Benazir Bhutto precipitates heightened levels of violence and political turmoil.\"  15. (U) Codel Specter departed this morning.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 12:59", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005382  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR OPS CENTER, SCA  EMBASSY ISLAMABAD REQUESTS THAT THIS MESSAGE RE RELEASED AS AN IMMEDIATE ALDAC TELEGRAM.  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: OTRA, AMGT, ASEC, PK SUBJECT:  INSTRUCTIONS TO DEFER FOR THE NEXT 72 HOURS NON-ESSENTIAL TRAVEL TO PAKISTAN   1.  AmEmbassy Islamabad requests all non-essential travel to Pakistan be deferred for the next 72 hrs (until 31 December, after 1800 HRS local time, or 0800 HRS Eastern Standard Time).  This is a precautionary measure because, in the aftermath of the death of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, there are widespread traffic problems and protests along the roads between Pakistan's posts in Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore and Peshawar and their respective airports.  Given the current difficulties in reaching those airports, Pakistan's posts cannot provide the necessary support for airport arrivals and departures.  2. Mission Pakistan appreciates that some inbound travelers may be inconvenienced by the need to reschedule travel, but prudence dictates we adopt this precautionary measure.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 13:30", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005383  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO'S ASSASSINATION: THE DAY AFTER  REF: ISLAMABAD  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C)  Summary.  Benazir Bhutto's family and supporters are consumed with funeral and mourning ceremonies, but the struggle for party leadership between Benazir's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, and PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem has begun. The USG is perceived as being the power behind Bhutto's return to Pakistan, and Faheem's supporters already are touting the Secretary's December 27 call as evidence of USG support for his leadership in the party.  We believe that intervention with Nawaz Sharif to argue against a boycott would be well-received by both the government and the PPP. We anticipate that the current violence will subside in most of Pakistan after the three-day mourning period ends.  End Summary.  2.  (U)  Pakistan this morning is reeling with shock and gloom over the December 27 assassination of Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto.  The funeral began at 1430 local time in Larkana; the GOP sent a C-130 and helicopters to transfer Bhutto's body from Rawalpindi to Larkana.  Benazir's husband, Asif Ali Zardari and Benazir's three children arrived last night.  Bhutto has been interred next to her father, Zulfikar, and the scene at the family home in Larkana is chaotic as grief-stricken supporters are swarming the house, grounds and family mausoleum.  3.  (C)  Following sporadic violence across Pakistan last night, attacks on vehicles, banks and government offices continued today, particularly in Bhutto's home province of Sindh and in Balochistan.  The GOP declared a three-day mourning period so government offices, shops, banks and the stock exchange are closed.  The media is reporting al Qaeda has claimed credit, but much of PPP supporters' anger and frustration is being directed at government-related targets because they blame the GOP for not providing Bhutto with adequate security.  The fact that Bhutto, a Sindhi, was killed in the Punjab will be played out in inter-provincial rivalries for years to come.  4.  (C)  We expect violence to continue during the three-day mourning period in major cities, and probably for several more days in Karachi and other parts of Sindh.  Several commentators noted that the attack on Bhutto took place in Liaquat Bagh, a field where Pakistan's first Prime Minister was assassinated in 1951 and a government paramilitary force attacked a political rally in 1973; it is near where Benazir's father was hung by President Zia in 1979.  Although today's press coverage provided fairly balanced obituaries describing Bhutto's strengths and weaknesses, we expect she will increasingly be idolized in the coming days.  It is important to remember that Benazir, her father and her two brothers were all murdered; to Pakistanis, the family is akin to the Kennedys, and the people need to vent their national grief.  Here, grief often translates into violent acts, but it remains to be seen whether the current violence will carry over into the new year and the scheduled elections.  PPP Leadership Vacuum ---------------------  5.  (C)  Bhutto's death 12 days before the general election leaves the party in a serious quandry, and there are already signs of a power struggle.  Bhutto's demanding and autocratic style left little room for competitors to emerge, so most PPP leadership skills are as yet untested.  The main contenders for party leadership are Benazir's husband, Zardari, and PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem.  Another possibility is Aitzaz Ahsan, the lawyer who defended the former Chief Justice and is now President of the Supreme Court Bar Association.  6.  (C)  PPP is a family-based feudal party that has been living on the legacy of former Prime Minister Zulfakir Bhutto and now his daughter Benazir.  Therefore, the natural choice for Benazir's successor would be a direct family member. However, Benazir's sister Sanam has shunned politics, and Benazir's children are too young (aged 18, 17 and 14). Zardari, although unpopular with party rank and file, could be considered as a placeholder at least until one of the children takes over.  Zardari comes with a great deal of  ISLAMABAD 00005383  002 OF 003   baggage, so much so that he did not return to Pakistan with Benazir when she returned from exile in October.  He has spent 11 years in and out of prison, charged but never convicted of crimes ranging from blackmail and extortion to murder.  He is known as \"Mr. Ten-Percent\" because of his alleged corruption during Benazir's terms as Prime Minister. Zardari reportedly is in poor health with diabetes, heart trouble and spinal injuries.  But he was particularly vocal in accusing the GOP of complicity after the October 18 bombing of Bhutto's welcome home rally in Karchi; he is likely to repeat his attacks on the GOP in the next few days.  7.  (C)  Faheem was the PPP in-country leader during Bhutto's eight years of self-imposed exile; he is a senior parliamentarian, former Minister of Communications (1993-2002) and Housing (1993-1996) and he competed for Prime Minister with the PML's Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain in 2004. Faheem is well-respected in PPP party circles and is known as a completely loyal Bhutto supporter.  He is moderate and secular. He leads a spiritual group which promotes the peaceful Sufi values of Islam (while enjoying an occasional bloody mary).  Importantly for a Sindh-based party, he is from Hala in Sindh.  But Faheem is known as a weak leader with little of the charisma needed to lead an emotionally devastated party as a Prime Minister.  8.  (C)  Ahsan is undoubtedly PPP's most brilliant mind and strategist.  He was the only Pakistani politician to capitalize on the March suspension of the former Chief Justice by organizing nation-wide rallies, and he mounted a stirring defense of the former Chief Justice in court. But Bhutto, then seeking a deal with Musharraf, did not endorse Ahsan's campaign and she barely approved his candidacy for re-election.  Ahsan has been hedging his bets, including by meeting with Nawaz Sharif in London earlier this year.  Ahsan also was considered the strategist who convinced the former Chief Justice to goad Musharraf into declaring a state of emergency.  Ahsan has since cast his lot with the lawyers; he withdrew his candidacy for re-election on December 15.  Our PPP contacts do not believe the party will adopt the controversial Ahsan as a leader because he had all but split with Bhutto prior to her death.  With Bhutto gone, however, Ahsan may well form a splinter party in the future.  Elections on Schedule? ---------------------  9.  (C)  Faheem announced December 27 that the PPP would adopt a 40 day period of mourning; all parties have suspended campaigning for the three-day mourning period announced the government.  All the PPP leaders are engaged in funeral/mourning so they have made no public statements on whether they will continue with elections.  However, analysts believe that the \"grief factor\" will enhance the PPP's chances in the upcoming elections.  Some observers have proposed a delay, but a delay is likely to expose the PPP leadership battle and over time create doubts about the party's ability to deliver all-important electoral perks.  10.  (C)  Shahbaz Sharif told CG Lahore (septel) that, indeed, the PML-N intends now to boycott the election.  The PML is still playing a dangerous game of hoping to undermine the credibility of the elections and promote street protests that require the Army to step in and restore order.  Despite public proclamations against the military's role in politics, Nawaz knows that this is the only way to deliver on his goal of ousting Musharraf.  11.  (C)  If Nawaz's PML-N party does boycott the elections, the most likely result will be to clear the field for Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi, the PML candidate, to become the next Prime Minister.  Before Bhutto's assassination, PML and PML-N share a center-right power base in the critical Punjab, and they were headed towards splitting the vote to Bhutto's benefit.  Some PLM-N members may contest despite the boycott.  12.  (C)  Musharraf reportedly will call an All Parties Conference in the coming days to consult with political parties on the way forward for elections.  At a minimum, there will be no more big rallies in the few remaining campaign days, and the government will have to use additional Army/police forces to maintain security on election day.  The  ISLAMABAD 00005383  003 OF 003   All Parties Conference could conclude that it is better to delay elections.  13.  (C)  Comment: The President's message of condolence and condemnation has been well received, but contacts caution that we wait until the three-day mourning period ends before engaging the PPP on political decisions. The USG is perceived as being the power behind Bhutto's return to Pakistan, and Faheem's supporters in the PPP already are touting the Secretary's December 27 call as evidence of USG support for  SIPDIS his leadership in the party.  However, we believe that intervention with the PML-N to argue against a boycott would be well-received by the government and the PPP.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 13:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005384  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES BHUTTO ASSASSINATION WITH NSA AZIZ  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)   1. (C)  Ambassador and DCM met NSA Tariq Aziz December 28 to discuss the GOP's reaction to the assassination of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto.  Aziz made the following points:  2.  (C)  The GOP will defer to the PPP on whether to proceed on schedule with the election.  Aziz said they will wait for the PPP to meet later this weekend after the three day mourning period and abide by the party's wishes as to whether or not to go forward.  3. (C)  The GOP has a phone intercept that has the Bhutto's killers boasting of their success to militant leader Baitullah Mehsood. The government plans to release the tape as well as a video of the actual bomb blast to the media. They have also reconstructed the face of the actual bomber who took three shots at Benazir before the bomb went off. The GOP claims that none of the shots hit Benazir and that she was killed by a the force of the explosive slamming her against the armor on the car.  She was standing up in the sunroof when the bomb went off.  All other occupants of the car survived with little or no injuries.  4.  (C) ISI director General Taj had a long (two hour) friendly meeting with Benazir the night before the bombing. They were discussing the way forward.  The meeting broke up at 2 am.  Aziz indicated they were making progress towards some sort of election arrangement  5.  (C)  The two likely candidates for leadership of the PPP are Benazir's husband Asif Ali Zardari and PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem.  6.  (C)  The GOP would welcome the U.S. meeting with Nawaz to urge him not to boycott the election,  7.  (C) Northwest Frontier Province Governor Orakzai is likely to be replaced in the next few days because of his inability to get things done and the deals he has made with the militants.  8.  (C)  There will be no new \"Emergency Rule\".  There may be isolated areas with curfews if the Army is called in to quell violence.  These will not last more than 48 to 72 hours. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 16:40", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005388  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PINR, SHUM, PK, PINS SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S NEXT PRIME MINISTER?   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4(b)(d).  1.     (S/NF) The Pakistan Muslim League has unofficially selected former Punjab Chief Minister and current head of the party's Punjab chapter, Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi, as its candidate for the Prime Ministership following the January 2008 national elections.  Elahi, who until the November 15 dissolution of the provincial governments served as Punjab's Chief Minister, has long been a prominent figure in center-right politics in the Punjab province.  While Elahi lacks the personal charisma of other major political leaders, such as the late Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, his political instincts and organizational skills more than compensate for this deficiency.  Unlike Bhutto and Sharif, who run their parties as personal fiefdoms based on the sheer force of their personalities, Elahi and his cousin/brother-in-law Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain have a history of deal-making and coalition-building with Pakistan's center-right, that has created personal and political ties between them and most of the Punjab's feudal and industrial elite.  2.     (S/NF) Elahi first came to prominence along with his older cousin and brother-in-law Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain as supporters of center-right leader Nawaz Sharif.  As Lahore-based Kashmiris who relied primarily on the army and intelligence agencies for political elevation, the Sharifs lacked personal ties and common ground with most of Punjab's center-right politicians who hailed from the province's traditional feudal and industrial families.  The Chaudhrys, industrialists from Gujrat, were among the first to recognize the Sharifs' rising influence in center-right politics and first formed business and later political ties to the family.  For this reason, both Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat were ultimately admitted to the Sharifs' inner circle, making them arguably the second most powerful family in the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz.  The Sharifs came to rely on the Chaudhrys for much of the political strategy and deal-making that kept the coalition of Punjabi feudals and industrialists -- on which the party was based -- working in tandem (despite Nawaz Sharif's notoriously difficult personality).  3.     (S/NF) The Chaudhrys' major rift with the Sharifs came following the 1997 elections.  Nawaz Sharif had ostensibly promised Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat that, in return for engineering an election campaign that resulted in a two-thirds majority for the party in the National Assembly, Ch. Pervaiz would be made Chief Minister of the Punjab. Following the party's victory, however, Nawaz broke his word and instead elevated his brother Shahbaz to the Chief Ministerial office -- leaving Elahi as Speaker of the Provincial Assembly.  While Elahi remained loyal to Nawaz and the PML-N, the relationship between the two families never fully recovered.  Ch. Pervaiz has raised this story on more than one occasion with the Principal Officer, as evidence of Sharif's lack of trust in non-family members, and as a reason for the break between the two families following the 1999 coup.  4.     (S/NF) The decision to remain with the PML-N in 1997, despite differences with the Sharifs, was largely due to the Chaudhrys' distaste for the Bhutto family -- a rivalry that pre-dates the current generation.  The Chaudhrys hold Benazir Bhutto's father responsible for the death of Ch. Pervaiz Elahi's father and for the imprisonment and torture of Ch. Shujaat Hussain's father during the elder Bhutto's tenure as Prime Minister.  Both Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat were briefly detained by the elder Bhutto.  Ch. Shujaat's father was a close advisor to Gen. Zia-ul-Haq following his 1979 coup against Bhutto, and is believed to have encouraged Gen. Zia to have Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto executed.  Rumor in Lahore is that Ch. Shujaat's father loaned Gen. Zia his pen to sign Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto's death warrant.  Ch. Pervaiz ostensibly purchased the same pen at an auction some years later.  The Chaudhrys are believed to have actively opposed a pre-electoral deal devised between Benazir Bhutto and President Musharraf in September 2007, largely due to their personal animosity for Bhutto.  Since her death, Elahi, in conversation, has suggested that he would be able to form a solid working relationship with either of her likely successors, Amin Faheem or Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari.  ISLAMABAD 00005388  002 OF 003    5.     (S/NF) Following the 1999 coup both Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat were detained by the National Accountability Bureau on corruption charges relating to unpaid state-owned bank loans that were made to their companies.  Charges against both were dropped following an agreement they made to defect from the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz and assist President Musharraf in building a new center-right Muslim League in Punjab.  The Chaudhrys are believed to have been offered this deal at the behest of National Security Council Secretary Tariq Aziz -- who they once counted as a close  SIPDIS political ally (they have since fallen out over differences relating to the award of PML tickets in 2002 and 2005, and Musharraf's negotiations with the late Benazir Bhutto).  The Chaudhrys carried out this new role in much the same manner as they had for the Sharifs, putting together a party based upon personal ties between them and other Punjabi feudals and industrialists.  While the party had no grassroots supporters, its candidates in both 2002 and 2005 performed well due to their personal influence in their local areas.  6.     (S/NF) As a reward for his political service, Ch. Pervaiz was appointed as Punjab Chief Minister following the 2002 national elections -- the post earlier denied to him by Nawaz Sharif.  By all accounts, Elahi performed exceptionally well in his role as an administrator.  He clearly defined his government's priorities (health care, education, and infrastructure development); devoted significant financial resources to these priority areas; and appointed capable, competent ministers to head these departments.  International donor agencies have certified that Elahi's government achieved significant improvements in many of the key indicators in these areas.  7.     (S/NF) Elahi and his family are not/not, however, immune from corruption.  There is little question that the family used its influence to secure and not repay substantial loans to a number of their businesses during the tenure of Nawaz Sharif.  In addition, during the Musharraf government Elahi and Shujaat regularly passed inside information on pending infrastructure developments to their children who owned property development companies, and who used this information to buy cheap land abutting pending developments and sell it at much higher prices later on.  The family equally used its influence to secure a District Nazim post in Gujrat for Shujaat's younger brother, who is regularly accused of siphoning off local development grants for his personal use with the tacit approval of his elders. Similarly, Elahi failed to take against political allies at the local or provincial level, who were accused of corruption during his time as Chief Minister.  8.     (S/NF) Elahi has been a strong supporter of President Musharraf's enlightened moderation agenda and favors swift, decisive law enforcement action against terrorists and extremist organizations.  Senior law-enforcement officials, who worked with Elahi as Chief Minister, claim that he gave clear instructions that significant resources were to be devoted to infiltrating and dismantling terrorist organizations and to monitoring and curtailing the activities of religious leaders believed to have extremist tendencies. Under his leadership, the Punjab police were successful in bringing down a number of terrorist cells in the province.  9.     (S/NF) At the same time, Elahi believes that the government must make a clear distinction between terrorists, and conservative religious figures.  While Elahi and his family are followers of moderate Sufi traditions, he has, largely for political reasons, built ties with more conservative Deobandi religious institutions, particularly the Deobandi madrassa board and the Tablighi Jamaat.  These individuals, who had been traditionally ignored by Punjab's center-right politicians (almost all of whom follow the Sufi school of through), have provided Elahi with a source of influence in these communities -- unparalleled by other main-stream politicians.  Elahi has used this influence to encourage reform within Punjab's madrassas and obtain strong statements from these leaders condemning terrorist violence and declaring its un-Islamic.  Absent the support he enjoyed in these quarters, it is doubtful that the government could have proceeded with its admittedly incomplete  ISLAMABAD 00005388  003 OF 003   religious-reform agenda.  10.    (S/NF) Elahi is a close advisor of President Musharraf, and is regularly consulted by him on political strategy.  This advice, however, is not always followed -- leading to a certain degree of tension in their relationship.  Elahi believes that if he and Shujaat had been listened to, the entire Chief Justice episode and the state of emergency could have been avoided.  If elected Prime Minister, Elahi will not content himself with the titular role played by his predecessors and will insist on full control over broad aspects of domestic policy and political strategy.  This will inevitably bring him into conflict with the President, although given their prior relationship, these issues can probably be resolved quite amicably.  11.    (S/NF) Elahi was born in 1945 and educated at Lahore's Forman Christian College and Watford College of Technology in London.  He is married with two sons.  The elder is a Sufi religious scholar, who avoids politics and public appearances.  The younger, Moonis Elahi, attended the Wharton Business School and is being groomed by his father as the family's political heir,  Moonis is contesting his first provincial assembly elections in January 2008, for seats in both Lahore and the family's base in Gujrat.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5359|07ISLAMABAD5380", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/29/2007 11:56", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005390  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, ASEC, AMGT, CASC, PINR, MARR, KFLO SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 4: BHUTTO'S FUNERAL FOLLOWED BY NIGHT OF WIDESPREAD UNREST  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5380      B. ISLAMABAD 5359  1. (U) SUMMARY.  Countrywide protests, violence and widespread arson followed the December 28 afternoon interment of Benazir Bhutto. Today has brought greater calm in many areas with most businesses closed and light traffic on the streets, but unrest continues in some cities, especially Karachi. The official three day mourning period for Bhutto concludes tomorrow, December 30, and mourners continue to descend on Larkana, the site of her ancestral home and family mausoleum.  A memorial service is scheduled for 1000 December 29 near Larkana.  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Vice Chairman Faheem told Ambassador there will be a PPP meeting tomorrow to decide the way forward on elections; personally, he supports having elections proceed as scheduled on January 8. (Note: The PPP's election decision will be taken a day earlier than we have reported and briefed.)  Embassy and Consulates Lahore and Peshawar are operating normally; Consulate Karachi continues on reduced staffing.  END SUMMARY.  GOVERNMENT SEEKS TO MAINTAIN ORDER  2. (U) Pakistan continues to grieve the death of Benazir Bhutto and many are venting their anger in public demonstrations often devolving into vandalism and arson.  The government continues to respond to the public's outrage in a steady and low-key manner, providing additional law-enforcement and military support as needed.  Chief of Army Staff Kayani and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Majid condemned Bhutto's assassination and made public statements offering condolences to her family and friends.  INITIAL RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION  3. (U) The Ambassador attended a December 29 briefing of the diplomatic corps at which the Interior Ministry presented the initial findings of the investigation into the December 27 assassination of Bhutto. (septel)  The government's announcement that Bhutto died, not from a bullet wound, but from striking her head on part of her vehicle in the midst of the attack, has received constant press coverage.  POLITICS AND ELECTIONS  4. (U) The government decided December 28 to convene a conference of all the political parties for consultations on general elections scheduled for January.  The date for such a conference not yet known.  5. (U) PPP President Makhdoom Amin Faheem told the Ambassador that PPP leadership would hold a party meeting tomorrow, December 29, in Larkana following the 10 am morning memorial service for Bhutto.  Faheem said his personal recommendation would be to hold elections as scheduled on January 8.  This decision will be taken a day earlier than we anticipated and have previously reported.  6. (U) Nawaz Sharif announced that if the government went forward with elections in January, it would destroy both the government and the country.  He called for a new caretaker government with no involvement by President Musharraf.  Nawaz visited Larkana today to pay a condolence call on the family.  7. (U) The Punjab government denied permission to Aitzaz Ahsan, currently under house detention, to attend Bhutto's funeral.  CG Lahore spoke with Ahsan today and reported that the GOP is blocking Ahsan's access to international and land phone service.  Ahsan confirmed that he is not a candidate to replace Bhutto as the PPP's leader; as a Punjabi, he would not be an appropriate leader for this Sindh-based political party.  PROTESTS  8. (U) In Karachi, the Army has deployed in two neighborhoods, the Malir and Bin Qasim (where Port Qasim is located), areas just east of the airport which are considered PPP strongholds.  Many parts of the town are silent, but CG Karachi reports continuing sporadic violence in some areas, and adds that about 20 people were killed and at least 80  ISLAMABAD 00005390  002 OF 002   wounded in past 36 hours.  Businesses remain closed following wide-spread arson and vandalism.  At least 600 vehicles have been burned and more than 20 buildings, including Karachi's Edhi Center, headquarters for Pakistan's largest welfare organization.  9. (U) CG Karachi is on reduced staffing and providing safehaven to local employees unable to return home due to unrest in the streets.  LARKANA  10. (U) CG Karachi reports that many mourners in Larkana went on a rampage after Bhutto's burial, torching stores, government buildings, a train station and numerous vehicles. Mourners chanted anti-Musharraf and anti-U.S. slogans. Grieving crowds continue to control the road between Larkana and Shikarpur, but people continue to arrive to pay their respects, many on foot because roads are either closed or impassable.  Sunday, December 30 marks the third and final day of the official mourning period for Bhutto.  SINDH PROVINCE  11. (U) The Army has taken control of the streets in many cities in Sindh, including Sukkur, Larkana, Badin, and Hyderabad.  Domestic flights, train service and bus transportation remain suspended throughout the Sindh province.  Fuel for vehicles is in short supply as stations remain closed and tankers are unable to travel the roads. Basic goods, including food, are also in increasingly short supply as blockaded roads and attacks on trucks have halted shipping for the time being.  12. (U) In Sukkur, roughly 100 government buildings and more than 20 other buildings were burned.  In Ghotki, the telephone exchange and circuit house were burned.  According to Pakistan Telecom Company Ltd, the damage to the telephone exchange has resulted in difficulties with international calls.  PESHAWAR  13. (U) CG Peshawar reports relative calm today.  A demonstration blocked roads this morning but there were no further reports of vandalism or violence.  Police are out in force, especially at major intersections.  Very few businesses are open (just small kiosks) and traffic is light.  LAHORE  14. (U) Although there were also overnight reports of vandalism and arson throughout cities in the Punjab, CG Lahore reports that Lahore is also calm today.  Businesses are closed and there is little traffic.  AMERICAN CITIZEN SERVICES  15. (U) Embassy and Consulates issued a warden's message at midnight December 29 cautioning American citizens to avoid travel to Pakistan during the official mourning period for Benazir Bhutto, which ends tomorrow December 30.  Also, the Mission has received no reports of injuries or deaths of American citizens.  Pakistan's Ministry of the Interior has advised foreign nationals to restrict their movements and avoid large gatherings.  INTERNATIONAL RESPONSES  16. (U) According to media reports, India has put its border forces on a \"high state of vigil\" and suspended cross-border bus and train links for at least a day.  17. (U) President Karzai has ordered Afghanistan's flag to be flown at half-mast in honor of Bhutto.  The flag will remain at half-mast until 0930 December 30.  Karzai met with Bhutto hours before her death and called her death \"an immense loss for Pakistan and the Muslim world.\" PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5384", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/29/2007 12:47", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005392  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER, MARR, ASEC SUBJECT: INITIAL BHUTTO INVESTIGATION BRIEFED TO DIP CORPS  REF: ISLAMABAD 5384  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: At a special briefing for the diplomatic corps December 29, Interior Secretary Kamal Shah presented the GOP's \"initial findings\" from the investigation into the Bhutto assassination.  Basing his conclusions primarily on medical reports, Shah stated that Bhutto was killed by the blunt impact of her head against the vehicle's sun roof hatch where she was thrown by the suicide bomber's blast.  Based on a cell phone intercept, Shah reported that Baitullah Mehsood's al Qaeda-Pakistan was behind the assassination. All this evidence would be shared with the Bhutto family, which would be able to choose a Lahore High Court judge to lead a parallel inquiry into whether security deficiencies occurred, as has been alleged.  Shah committed to continued security support to the diplomatic legations, but requested that ambassadors defer travel to Larkana \"until things cool down.\"  RSO has followed up with Interior Secretary Kamal Shah to obtain more details on the investigation.  End summary.  \"Tragic Assassination\" ----------------------  2. (C) Interior Secretary Kamal Shah met with the diplomatic corps in Islamabad December 29 to brief the initial findings of the investigation into the December 27 assassination of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto.  He stated that this information was being provided to be helpful, not/not as a \"defense\" of GOP actions before or since the assassination.  3. (C) Shah opened by stating that the GOP \"shares the grief and sorrow of the nation,\" adding his condolences to Bhutto's family and supporters.  He reiterated President Musharraf's condemnation, in the strongest terms, of this \"tragic assassination.\"  He informed the assembled diplomats that Pakistan Army troops had been moved to Karachi and interior Sindh to maintain the peace.  4. (C) Shah noted the multiple assassination attempts/plots since 2001 against Musharraf and former Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, as well as other cabinet members and army and police officials.  He also mentioned the assassination attempt against Bhutto upon her return to Karachi on October 18.  Shah blamed al Qaeda-Pakistan, led by Baitullah Mehsood, for all these terrorist acts, including Bhutto's assassination.  (Note: The Ambassador later stated that we should keep the focus on who killed Benazir Bhutto, not just the details of the investigation.  She added that USG information confirmed the long-standing efforts of Mehsood to kill Bhutto.)  Criminal Investigation ----------------------  5. (C) Shah emphasized that the information he was providing from Pakistan's Criminal Investigation Department (CID) was preliminary.  The CID Inspector General was leading an interagency team and had requested the assistance of domestic explosive experts.  He added that Pakistan was not requesting international help at this time.  (Note: The Ambassador later offered Shah USG law enforcement assistance.)  The head of the suicide bomber had been recovered, Shah claimed, and domestic forensic experts were currently trying to reconstruct the face.  6. (C) Recounting the timeline of December 27 evening, Shah stated that the Rawalpindi rally site was enclosed and \"swept\" for explosives before the campaign event.  The estimated 15,000 people who attended the rally were all searched before entering the area, Shah claimed.  The attack happened on the road outside.  Bhutto was standing in the sun roof of her armored SUV when three shots were fired, followed by a blast.  These actions were executed by the same attacker, Shah posited.  The other SUV occupants -- PPP President Makhdoom Amin Faheem, personal aide Naheed Khan, and security chief Iftiaz Hussain, who remained inside the vehicle -- were not injured.  7. (C) Shah presented photos showing damage to the vehicle on Bhutto's left, while her blood was found only on her right.  ISLAMABAD 00005392  002 OF 003   (Note: We have some photos, and RSO will obtain more.) Bhutto did not suffer bullet wounds from the three shots, contrary to initial press reports.  These reports were \"premature.\"  Instead, she was killed by a blow (\"depressed fracture\") to her right temple by a \"blunt object.\"  Shah concluded that the blast propelled Bhutto into a latch on the sun roof hatch.  In response to the Ambassador's specific question about the discrepancy between initial reports from the scene and Shah's presentation now, Shah said the GOP's findings were principally based on the medical report from the seven doctors who attended to Bhutto at Rawalpindi General Hospital.  He said a number of early reports were conveyed to the press from onlookers at the scene but turned out to be wrong.  He added that the body was also x-rayed, but a full autopsy was not conducted at Asif Ali Zardari's (husband) insistence.  Shah said, in response to a later question, that the government had sought a full post-mortem but was rebuffed by the family.  \"Strong Piece of Evidence\" --------------------------  8. (C) Since the attack, the GOP had intercepted a call from a Mehsood cell phone to an unidentified speaker, Shah stated.  Emphasizing that sharing this information was contrary to investigative protocols and would likely leave the GOP \"blind for several days\" on Mehsood activities, the taped conversation was such a \"strong piece of evidence\" against al Qaeda that he had decided to go public.  9. (C) In this intercepted Mehsood conversation, he reportedly congratulates the unidentified speaker and asks for the names of the actual attackers.  The unidentified speaker obliges, naming two men.  Shah claimed that a pair of attackers would be consistent with al Qaeda's modus operandi: one suicide bomber (preoccupied with the detonation) and an on-the-ground guide.  Unlike previous attacks, it is believed that this suicide bomber also fired a weapon, heard on the video of the scene.  Shah speculated that this new aspect was designed to disperse the principal's security personnel.  He said that the only question that arose was why he did not have the names of the individual bombers.  Shah speculated that Mehsood had dispatched a number of potential suicide bombers.  GOP Precautions ---------------  10. (C) Shah insisted to the assembled dip corps that Bhutto had received adequate security support from the GOP, noting that no other former prime minister received such protection and that not even the protection given to a sitting prime minister could stop all attacks (i.e., the attempts against now former Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz).  11. (C) Shah further noted that Bhutto was provided by the GOP a dedicated security officer of her choosing.  In addition, her vehicle was flanked on both sides and in front by security vehicles.  In response to PPP claims that electronic jammers did not work, Shah noted that jammers only disrupt a remote signal, but are useless against a suicide bomber who manually detonates an explosive.  Parallel Judicial Inquiry -------------------------  12. (C) The Ambassador asked Shah to clarify the purpose of a parallel judicial inquiry, announced December 28.  Would it have independent investigators?  Shah responded that this inquiry, to be led by an as-yet-named Lahore High Court justice, would confirm the event's timeline and Bhutto's cause of death, as well as identify any security deficiencies.  Shah stated that he had contacted PPP security advisor Rehman Malik to relay the offer that Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, select the judge whom he wanted to lead this parallel inquiry.  Zardari had not yet responded.  13. (C) In contrast, the CID investigation would aim to arrest and prosecute the assassins and conspirators, Shah stated.  Everything briefed December 28 \"would be evidence at trial.\"  Additionally, this evidence \"will be shared, in full, with the PPP,\" Shah committed.  14. (C) Comment: RSO has followed up with Interior Secretary  ISLAMABAD 00005392  003 OF 003   Kamal Shah to get access to the assassination scene pictures and Bhutto x-rays to try to assess these GOP initial findings.  The offer to ask Zardari to name the judge who will preside over a parallel judicial inquiry is a welcome one, but it remains to be seen if this will satisfy PPP critics of the investigation.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5380|07ISLAMABAD5390|07ISLAMABAD5392", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/30/2007 12:04", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005393  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, MARR, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 5: PPP POST-BENAZIR STRATEGY; REJECTION OF MEDICAL REPORT; DEATH IMPACTS ECONOMY  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5392 ISLAMABAD 5390      B. ISLAMABAD 5380  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Order was being restored in much of Pakistan on the last day of the 3-day mourning period in memory of Benazir Bhutto.  In Sindh and its major city of Karachi, violence and casualties continued with widespread property loss.  Shops remained closed, but airports and roads reopened.  The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) was meeting today to choose the party's successor to Benazir and formulate a post-Benazir strategy; the PPP is expected to make a public announcement on its decisions at 5 pm local (probably later).  There are growing indications that the elections will be postponed (see septel for Ambassador's conversations with NSA Tariq Aziz, PPP Vice Chairman Faheem and Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat). There was significant coverage of the investigation with many sources questioning the GOP's determination of the cause of Bhutto's death.  Baitallah Mehsood denied any involvement with the assassination, while PPP leaders, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, and Nawaz Sharif accused the GOP of mishandling the investigation.  Financial losses from the post-assassination violence are mounting, and transportation problems are exacerbating fuel and food shortages in Sindh. Analysts predict significant losses when the Karachi Stock Market reopens on Monday. Iran officially closed its border with Pakistan pending a reduction in violence. Mission Pakistan continues to operate normally, and all offices will reopen tomorrow, Monday, December 31.  We expect transportation problems may limit our locally engaged staff's ability to come to work. End summary.  PPP POST-BENAZIR STRATEGY  2. (C) The Central Executive Committee of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) was meeting today following a memorial service and the reading of Benazir's will to discuss a post-Benazir strategy.  Sources in the PPP predict that Benazir's son will be named titular head of the party, backed by his father, Asif Ali Zardari, with PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem controlling party operations.  This has yet to be confirmed.  The PPP will also today discuss whether to go forward with elections.  Faheem told Ambassador (septel) that the party was now leaning toward a delay in elections.  The PPP is expected to make a public statement around 5 pm local time, although we expect this will be delayed.  INVESTIGATION QUESTIONED  3. (U) Local media reports that Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan chief Baitallah Mehsood denied on December 29 that his organization had any role in the assassination of Bhutto after the Ministry of Interior (MOI) announced on December 28 that Baitallah's men had carried out the attack.  A spokesman for the group unconvincingly said that killing a woman is against their tribal customs and traditions.  4. U) MOI reiterated the GOP's pledge to the diplomatic corps (Ref A) that it is prepared to conduct an autopsy if the Bhutto's family allowed for the exhumation of Bhutto's body and made the request for an autopsy to take place.  Today's media included multiple articles that questioned or ridiculed the MOI investigation due to its changing theories--from gunshot to shrapnel to a skull fracture.  Sherry Rehman, the PPP Information Secretary, told local media that she saw the bullet wound while washing Bhutto's body in preparation for the funeral, and she accused the GOP of a cover-up. The General Secretary of Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), Iqbal Haider, demanded that the United Nations' experts should investigate the assassination in the same way it had investigated Lebanese PM Hariri's death.  Haider said that the medical report was \"concocted and ridiculous\" and that the HRCP would not accept the judicial commission of the probe as it was not independent.  5. (U) Former prime minister Nawaz Sharif met with Asif Ali Zardari, the husband of Bhutto, to offer his condolences. Prior to this meeting, Nawaz told reporters that the assassination was a result of inadequate security provided to  ISLAMABAD 00005393  002 OF 003   her by the GOP.   GOP SEEKS TO MAINTAIN ORDER  6. (U) President Musharraf ordered a crackdown on December 29 against elements involved in the looting and torching of public and private buildings following the assassination of Bhutto and directed authorities to arrest those committing these acts under the Anti-Terrorism Act.   ELECTIONS  7. (U) President Musharraf announced that he would like to see elections continue as scheduled but a final decision on the matter would be made after the political parties are consulted.  The Election Commission of Pakistan announced that it is also considering a postponement of the January 8 general elections because the security situation in some areas of the country were not conducive to hold the election.   See septel for Ambassador's conversations with NSA Tariq Aziz and Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain; it appears there is a consensus growing for a postponement of elections until mid-February.  ECONOMIC IMPACT  8. (U) Most businesses across Pakistan remained closed on Sunday; in Sindh Province, there were reports of mounting shortages of food, dairy, and fuel products.  Transport companies have been unable to make deliveries to wholesalers, and many shopkeepers report empty shelves.  Fuel stations are either out of gas or running very low.  Estimates of the official economic impact will begin to be compiled during the next week to account for lost property and investments. Daily wage earners, including factory workers and contractors, will be particularly hit hard due to the coupled closures for official mourning following the EID holiday closures.  Many factories simply remained closed and without public transportation, many employees are simply unable to report to work.  9. (U) Local insurance companies are expecting huge losses to be reported as a result of the violence across Pakistan, with the largest losses expected in Karachi.  Looted shops, factories, burned vehicles, and vandalized bank branches will constitute the majority of insurance claims.  Local media reports that several insurance companies fear the loss could be in the billions of dollars and could result in the collapse of some of Pakistan's twelve national insurance companies.  10. (U) While information is still being collected, early estimates provide that over 150 branches of local banks were looted, burned, or partially damaged. The continued violence has delayed the official tallies of damage to ATMs and banks.  Some bank owners report to EconOffs that they expect massive capital flight when banks reopen on Monday as looting is expected to continue.  11. (U) The Karachi Stock Exchange (KSE) is expected to reopen on Monday, and local contacts report to EconOffs that they expect the KSE 100 Index to take a major hit due to the political uncertainty.  KSE has an automatic trigger mechanism that halts trading if the overall index falls five percent by volume.   SINDH PROVINCE  12. (U) The Election Commission in Sindh reports that its offices in nine districts were torched, and basically everything within the offices was destroyed, including the ballots and ballot boxes for the January 8 elections. The Army has been deployed in 16 Sindh districts, and the Pakistan Railways has asked for the Army to patrol the tracks.  Airports and roads have reopened, but with the limited fuel supplies, flights are still limited and few vehicles are on the road.  The train service is still suspended due to damages to the tracks, and it has been  ISLAMABAD 00005393  003 OF 003   reported that it will be at least until January 5 before any repairs can be made and normal service resumes.  KARACHI  13. (U) A mob torched a parking lot of vehicles near the Financial Trade Center.  Locals report that gangs of Afghans and Pathans from North Nazimabad, armed with shovels and pickaxes, looted several local banks and stores.  Fires continue throughout the city.  Food stuffs are continuing to dwindle, especially water, due to roads blocks preventing delivery trucks from getting to certain neighborhoods.  Six people were killed in Lyari, a PPP stronghold.  LAHORE  14. (U) Lahore remains quiet.  Several prayer services for Bhutto are planned for today and are expected to remain peaceful.  Shops and petrol stations remain closed, but some stores in the more affluent areas of Lahore are quietly reopening.  Public transportation is starting to reemerge on the roadways, but the closure of the petrol stations is preventing many rickshaws from returning.  With the end of the 3-day mourning period on Monday, transport and shops are expected to reopen.  PESHAWAR  15.  (U) Peshawar CG reports that the city is quiet today.   AMERICAN CITIZEN SERVICES  16. (U) Embassy and Consulates report that no emergency ACS calls have been made.  The three Consulates also report that airports and roads have reopened in their areas, allowing flights to take place and people to travel to and from the airports more freely.   INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE  17. (U) On December 29, Iran closed its border with Pakistan for an indefinite period in view of the uncertainty in Pakistan.  Sources said the Government of Iran took the decision after the unrest in Panjgur, Turbat, Gwadar, Mand, and Taftan areas of Balochistan.  18. (U) Media reports that train service with India has been restored. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5394", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/30/2007 12:15", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005394  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, ECON, ETRD, EICN, EINV, PBTS, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: OPEN COMPETITION LEADS TO VERY LOW MOBILE PHONE RATES  1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Pakistan's telecommunication policy reforms earned the country USD 8.0 billion in investments over the past four years.  Promotion of open competition in the telecom industry has led to some of the lowest mobile phone rates in the world and substantially increased the average Pakistani's access to overall phone communication.  The telecom industry is an incredibly positive force in the economy and will continue to be so as long as the reforms stay in place. END SUMMARY.  Telecom Growth Engine --------------------------------------------- ------- 2. (SBU) Pakistan's telecom sector has become a major engine of economic growth as a result of the Pakistan Telecom Authority (PTA) policy reforms.  These changes lead to incredibly low mobile phone rates and USD 8.0 billion in investment by telecom companies over the past four years.  Currently, 48 percent of the population has access to some form of mobile communication service while 89 percent have access to a telephone service. Teledensity has increased from 4 percent in 2003 to 35 percent in 2007.  3. (SBU) Many government officials have extolled the telecom sector's impressive performance in press and speeches over the last year.  The Secretary of Information Technology, Farrakh Qayyum, said in a local press article that the telecom sector constitutes 2 percent of the GDP and is expected to rise to 3 percent in the next three to four years.  In a speech to the World Bank in May, former Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz said the telecom sector is a major employer of skilled jobs as its exponential growth has resulted in the creation of 80,000 jobs directly and 500,000 jobs indirectly. The government receipts from the telecom sector as taxes, dividends, and indirect revenues amount to USD 1.3 billion per year.  Very Low Mobile Rates --------------------------------------------- -------  4. (SBU) Currently, Mobilink, the largest of six mobile telecom operators in Pakistan, offers rates as low as USD 0.013/minute for outgoing calls and USD 0.016/SMS text message. Domestic and international calls via mobile phones are extremely cheap at USD 0.05/minute.  Sargana explained that the PTA monitors the rates of the Significant Market Power Players (SMPP) and ensures that SMPPs do not drop their tariff rates to a degree that would drive smaller operators out of the market.  PTA uses Mobilink as a benchmark to determine the tariff structure.  Past Monopoly and Present Open Competition --------------------------------------------- ----  5. (SBU) Mr. Arif Sargana, Director of Economic Affairs, PTA, discussed with EconOffs on Nov 27 the innovative policies.  Prior to 2003, mobile and fixed line rates were very expensive in Pakistan because then state-owned Pakistan Telecommunications Company Limited (PTCL), a government-owned enterprise, had a monopoly on all fixed line telephone services and set the tariff rates.  According to Sargana, PTCL rebuffed suggestions by the GOP to lower tariff rates and insisted that the government pay a subsidy to replace lost revenue.  In 2005 the GOP sold PTCL to the private Dubai-based telecom company Etisalat in a deal worth USD 2.57 billion.  The sale was part of the GOP's plan to privatize government-owned, money-making ventures and increase the foreign exchange reserves.  6. (SBU) Mobile services began operation in Pakistan in 1990 with only two companies, Mobilink and Ufone.  Egyptian owned Mobilink had a 70 percent market share and Ufone was owned by PTCL, which resulted in little market competition.  Most mobile phone activity was concentrated in the urban areas. Sargana credited, former PTA Chairman, retired Major General Shahzada Alam Malik, as instrumental in bringing down tariff rates.  Malik convinced the GOP to allow more mobile players into the market.  As a result, Telenor (Norwegian) and Warid (UAE) entered the market and paid USD 291 million each for an operating license from PTA.  7. (SBU) PTA decided to institute a program called Calling Party Pays (CPP) in 2001 to allow mobile operators to set their own rates for outgoing calls and SMS text messaging, said Sargana, but prohibited charges for incoming calls. CPP has given a boost to the mobile telecom sector and the market has grown at a tremendous pace - USD 2.3 million subscribers added per month.  Spurring Investment and Access --------------------------------------------- ----   ISLAMABAD 00005394  002 OF 002   8. (SBU) Part of the open market success story is PTA's structure for charging license fees of USD 291 million to telecom operators in the mobile market.  In Pakistan, mobile operators pay 50 percent of the set licensing fee in the first three to four years and the remaining 50 percent over ten year installments.  By comparison, in India, operators pay low initial licensing fees, but pay 10 percent of their annual revenues as fees to the government.  Sargana believes that the fixed rate method rather than the percentage rate method for licensing fees makes investment more attractive in Pakistan because investors earn more revenue over the long-run.  Rural Telecom Development Planned --------------------------------------------- ------  9. (SBU) PTA has programs for rural telecom development through the Universal Service Fund (USF) which has a balance of USD 83 million, Sargana said.  Over the next year PTA will help set up 400 telecenters in rural areas equipped with telephone, fax machines, scanners, and photocopiers. Approximately 40 centers were already established free of cost.  PTA also has a program collaborating with two microfinance banks to provide loans of up to USD 833 to encourage the set up of similar centers in other rural areas in addition to the offer of reduced tariffs.  10. (SBU) COMMENT: The telecom sector is a critical part of Pakistan's growth and demonstrates the potential short-term results that can be achieved through privatization and government reform. Pakistan's telecom industry is one of the most progressive sectors of the economy.  The continued potential growth and attractive investment returns appear to mitigate the political risk for foreign investors in this sector.  END COMMENT.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5388", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/30/2007 15:28", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005395  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/29/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO'S SON (AND HUSBAND) NEW PPP LEADERS; PPP SUPPORTS ELECTIONS ON TIME  REF: ISLAMABAD 5388  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C)  The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) has chosen Benazir's son, Bilawal Bhutto, to lead the party, with support from her husband, Asif Ali Zardari as a co-chair. Amin Faheem will continue as Vice Chairman and be the PPP's candidate for Prime Minister.  While Bilawal finishes his degree at Oxford, Asif Ali Zardari would lead the party, but he will not be a candidate.  Over 90% of PPP members attending today's meeting supported going forward with elections as scheduled on January 8. In a press conference, an emotional Zardari called on Nawaz Sharif to participate in elections and asked for a Hariri-type UN investigation into Bhutto's death.  2.  (C)  In separate conversations with Ambassador, NSA Aziz and Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat confirmed that the GOP would follow the PPP's wishes, but both noted logistical problems created by the post-assassination violence would make it increasingly difficult to have the election on January 8.  Shujaat and Aziz also confirmed that the idea of an international investigation into Bhutto's death had been discussed and rejected by Musharraf.  Shujaat indicated that, with the PPP under Bilawal, Zardari and Faheem, there was a good chance for PML and PPP to form a coalition government after the elections.  3.  (C)  In our view, we will need to press the government to allow some type of international review of the assassination investigation.  End Summary.  PPP Leadership --------------  4.  (C)  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Vice Chairman Amin Faheem and Senator Enver Baig called Post several times December 28 and 29 to update us on the progress of PPP party negotiations.   The final decision was that Benazir's son Bilawal Bhutto would lead the party, while her husband, Asif Ali Zardari acted as co-chair. Amin Faheem would continue as Vice Chairman and be the party's choice for Prime Minister. While Bilawal finishes his degree at Oxford, Zardari will lead the party.  Baig told Ambassador that Zardari would not stand for election, and over 90% of PPP leaders at today's meeting supported going forward with elections on January 8. After the press conference, Ambassador congratulated Faheem on the PPP's decision; he confirmed he would be the party's choice for Prime Minister.  5.  (C) Baig told Polcouns that, in her will, Benazir had named her husband Asif Ali Zardari to take over leadership of the party, but Zardari had declined urging instead that Benazir's son Bilawal (aged 19, currently enrolled at Oxford) be given the title of party chief.  The compromise was a joint chairmanship for now.  6.  (C)  Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain told Ambassador that neither Zardari nor Bilawal had a college degree; therefore, neither was eligible to be a candidate for Parliament or Prime Minister.  Shujaat indicated that Zardari would not stand for election because he knows the Army would not support someone with Zardari's questionable reputation.  Elections Postponement ----------------------  7.  (C)  In a December 29 phone conversation, Tariq Aziz confirmed to the Ambassador that the government would accept whatever decision PPP made about when the elections could take place.  Aziz also confirmed press reports that several Election Commission Offices in Sindh had been burned down, printing presses are closed preventing printing of election ballots, and fuel shortages are complicating delivery of ballots which have been printed.  It would, therefore, be difficult to hold elections on January 8.  8.  (C)  In a December 29 meeting with Ambassador,  Shujaat  ISLAMABAD 00005395  002 OF 003   said that he and PML Punjab leader Pervaiz Elahi had met yesterday with President Musharraf to discuss the election situation.  Shujaat confirmed that the government will wait for PPP's decision on how to proceed but also confirmed the logistical and security problems the Election Commission now faces.  Shujaat and Elahi polled over 40 of their key party leaders; the majority in Punjab and Balochistan were prepared to go forward with elections on January 8, but those in Sindh (the site of the worst post-assassination violence) and Northwest Frontier Province supported a delay.  Shujaat said that the PPP's 40 day mourning period would end on February 5, and the Muslim holy month of Muharram would end on February 10; therefore, elections could be held on February 14, 16 or 18.  Electoral Fallout -----------------  9.  (C)  Shujaat said that Bhutto's assassination would clearly give the PPP a boost at the polls, particularly in urban Sindh and Punjab.  But he noted that voter registration was lower in urban than rural areas.  He predicted that Nawaz Sharif would again reverse himself and participate in elections if the PPP participated.  He dismissed the idea that Fazlur Rehman's Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam party would be weaker because of its record of poor governance in the Northwest Frontier Province.  Shujaat reluctantly agreed that Bhutto's assassination and a election postponement that gives Nawaz more time to campaign would undercut the PML's vote, but he remained confident the PML would get the majority necessary to form a coalition government.  10.  (C)  Shujaat said that PML relations with both Zardari and Faheem were excellent and insisted that the chances for a PPP-PML coalition government were better than they had been before Bhutto's death.  Speaking personally, Shujaat said he faced his own family's opposition to dealing with Bhutto because of their family history (Reftel).  Shujaat described Zardari as a clever man, but one who was not in good health. When he was Interior Minister under Nawaz Sharif, Shujaat personally had assisted Zardari in avoiding extradition to the UK on trumped-up narcotics charges.  Shujaat described Faheem as being honest but weak.  Shujaat said that under Bhutto, no one else in the PPP had the opportunity for much independent action, so it was perhaps premature to underestimate Faheem's leadership capabilities.  But, we would have to ask the PPP if they were willing to join a coalition with the PML.  Independent Investigation -------------------------  11.  (C)  Ambassador again raised with Aziz the need for an independent/international investigation of Bhutto's death. Aziz said he had spoken to Zardari about his decision forbidding an autopsy.  Aziz explained that autopsies were controversial, particularly for females, but Aziz said he had argued in vain with the President for an international inquiry.  12.  (C)  Shujaat confirmed that the issue had been discussed with Musharraf and that Aziz had argued for an international investigation but had been voted down.  As an alternative, Shujaat had suggested that an international team of experts be invited to receive a briefing on the GOP's findings.  In contrast to Aziz, however, Shujaat said that autopsies were perfectly normal in Pakistan in response to magistrate's order, so if the Bhutto family allowed her body to be exhumed, the government could conduct another post-mortem based on an autopsy.  13.  (C)  Comment:  None of PPP's current lineup (Zardari, Bilawal and Faheem) are likely to give the PPP strong leadership in the short-term, but the decision to keep party control in the family is not surprising.  We see two troublesome issues.  First, the decision of the PPP to go forward with elections on January 8, when it may be logistically difficult.  We expect this will be the subject of negotiations in the next few days.  The second is an international investigation, particularly now that the party has formally called for UN intervention.  The GOP will not  ISLAMABAD 00005395  003 OF 003   welcome such an investigation.  The best news is the possibility for a strong, stable PML-PPP coalition government after the elections.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5393", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/31/2007 12:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005410  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, MARR SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 6: CALM BEING RESTORED; ELECTION DECISION DEFERRED; STOCKS DROP  REF: ISLAMABAD 5393  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan today slowly returned to life after three days of mourning for Benazir Bhutto.  Major cities were largely quiet December 31, with most businesses open and public transportation running.  Pakistan's Election Commission deferred to tomorrow a decision on whether elections can occur January 8.  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Makhdoom Amin Faheem is meeting with Musharraf tonight regarding election timing.  Opposition parties, including Pakistan People's Party are committed to contesting elections on time, but there are logistical hurdles, especially in Sindh where several election offices were torched over the weekend.  Trading on the Karachi Stock Exchange has been suspended for today due to a five percent drop in trading. The GOP agreed to a Scotland Yard investigation of the Bhutto assassination, but we have no confirmation that a request has been conveyed to the U.K.  Embassy and consulates returned to regular operations.  End summary.  Calm Being Restored -------------------  2. (SBU) After three days of mourning (and violent riots), Pakistan's cities were relatively quiet December 31, with some small demonstrations randomly occurring.  CGs Peshawar and Lahore report a return to \"normalcy,\" with most shops, gas stations and other businesses open and city public transportation running.  Islamabad and Rawalpindi have been normal.  There were reports late December 31 of sporadic violence in Karachi related to rumors of attacks on the Muttahida Quami Movement's (MQM) headquarters.  National and international (to/from India) train lines are also re-opening.  Election Decision Deferred --------------------------  3. (U) Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) postponed to January 1 a decision on whether the scheduled January 8 general elections could go forward.  It has asked for reports from provincial governments and ECP branch offices.  4. (U) Sindh's provincial election commissioner has already stated that several district offices were torched over the last three days, destroying ballot boxes and voters' lists. The printing of ballots has also been delayed.  The Sindh official doubted elections could be held on time in these areas, estimating that three weeks were needed to get back on schedule.  5. (SBU) Pakistan People's Party (PPP) decided December 30 to go forward with elections on schedule.  In light of this decision, fellow opposition Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) confirmed December 31 that it, too, will contest elections (contrary to Nawaz Sharif's publicly-stated inclinations on December 27).  Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman was quoted as \"favoring a slight delay\" in elections.  Musharraf's Pakistan Muslim League party is prepared to delay elections until mid-February.  The Investigation -----------------  6. (C) Pakistan's National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz to the Ambassador December 31 that it will abide by a Bhutto family request and have Scotland Yard conduct an independent investigation of Bhutto's assassination.  However, the U.K. has not received any request so far.  The press is full of conspiracy theories.  Several home videos that purport to show various versions of the assassination are being shown on local TV.  Karachi Stock Exchange Drops ----------------------------  7. (SBU) The Karachi Stock Exchange's KSE 100 Index lost 647.9 points in heavy trading triggering the overall five percent loss threshold, which suspended trading.  Trading will resume tomorrow.  The KSE 100 index fell from 14772.08 to 14077.16 overall.  This drop is not unique in comparison  ISLAMABAD 00005410  002 OF 002   to past market reactions to other major, national crises, and the KSE 100 is still up about 40 percent for the year. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5411", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/31/2007 12:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005411  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: CODEL SPECTER MEETING WITH CHAIRMAN OF JOINT CHIEF OF STAFF  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  In a December 27 meeting with General Tariq Majid, Pakistan's Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Senator Arlen Specter and Representative Patrick Kennedy stressed the importance of U.S.-Pakistan military cooperation, support for Pakistan's counter-terrorism efforts, and the potential impact of recent domestic political events, especially President Musharraf's November dismissal of Pakistan's Supreme Court.  END SUMMARY.  FINDING BIN LADEN AND COMBATING MILITANTS  2. (C)  Specter asked Majid about the status of Pakistan's efforts to capture Osama bin Laden.  Majid replied that Pakistan continued to focus on locating bin Laden, agreeing that he could be in the remote Afghanistan-Pakistan border area.  Majid stressed the need for more accurate intelligence in the hunt for bin Laden, as well as the importance of integrated U.S.-Pakistan efforts to locate him.  3. (C)  Specter said that he understood Pakistan's military was experiencing increasing difficulty in exerting control over some of the tribal areas.  Majid acknowledged there were challenges but pointed out there had been many successes as well.  Majid observed that prior to 9/11 these areas had largely \"managed themselves,\" but since then government forces had increasingly extended their presence into these areas, especially the paramilitary Frontier Corps.  However, he added, these forces could not be everywhere and some areas were virtually inaccessible.  The GoP had been steadily expanding the Frontier Corps and would continue to do so. Majid also noted that nearly 100,000 troops were supporting Special Forces efforts in these areas and Pakistan had increased the number of its  border posts from 80-90 to almost 1,000.  4. (C) The discussion then turned to the deployment and sustainability of Pakistan's troops.  Majid stated that of 190 infantry units, 146 were deployed in \"hard\" areas, such as the disputed areas with India, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Baluchistan.  Majid acknowledged that Pakistan found it difficult to sustain these long-term deployments.  POSSIBLE EXPANSION OF IMET  5. (C) Kennedy praised Pakistan's close military cooperation with the U.S., a key element in the war on terror.  Majid agreed, noting that he would like to see the relationship become more broad-based, including participation injoint training and exercises.  Both Kennedy and Majid agreed the International Military Exchange Training (IMET) program had proven beneficial to both the U.S. and Pakistan, and served as a critical tool in building relationships and developing capacity.  Kennedy said he supported expanding the IMET program with Pakistan and would like to work with Majid to make this happen.  MAJID DENIES SECURITY ASSISTANCE DIVERTED BY GOP  6. (C) Kennedy raised the issue of the U.S. attaching conditions to Pakistan's use of some U.S. military assistance.  He stressed that one of the primary purposes of such conditionality was to ensure the assistance reached the Pakistan military.  Referring to Majid's earlier remarks regarding sustainability of deployed forces, Kennedy added that it was critical to ensure Pakistan,s forces received sufficient resources.  Majid, however, dismissed the suggestion that the central government was not directing all U.S. assistance to support appropriate military operations. He insisted that the funding went to support forces in the field \"indirectly.8  He added, referring to the policy the UN uses to determine compensation for countries contributing forces to UN operations, that the  U.S. should use the UN approach to improve U.S. CSF utility to compensate people hurt by collateral damage during operations against militants, provide compensatory expenses for soldiers, families, etc.  MAJID URGES PASSING OF ROZ LEGISLATION   ISLAMABAD 00005411  002 OF 003   7. (C) Kennedy observed that the struggle against extremists was not just a military one, but a political one as well. Majid agreed, saying that military action could only be one element of a successful strategy in combating militants.  He pointed to the urgent need for improved social infrastructure and economic opportunities in these areas, adding that the proposed Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs) could prove very helpful.  He expressed his hope that U.S. legislation authorizing the ROZs would soon be expedited.  PAKISTAN,S NUCLEAR ARSENAL SECURE  8. (C) Specter then raised the issue of the security of Pakistan's nuclear arsenal.  Majid responded that Pakistan engaged closely and systematically with the U.S. to ensure effective custodial controls were in place and that the National Command Authority was firmly in control of all nuclear weapons.  He added that only Pakistan's civilian leadership had authority to order use of the weapons.  9. (C) Specter asked Majid if, in his opinion, Pakistan and India could one day create a nuclear weapon-free zone on the subcontinent.  Majid said it was possible and Pakistan had already \"made the offer,\" but that India would need to take the first step toward disarmament for Pakistan to follow suit.  Majid speculated, however, that India was unlikely to do so as it had \"a more global outlook\" militarily, whereas Pakistan's primary concern was defense (from India).  10. (C) Specter shared his concerns regarding Iran's potential development of nuclear weapons and asked what Pakistan's position would be regarding military options in addressing the threat, should it arise.  Majid indicated that Pakistan had no problem with Iran developing a nuclear program for peaceful purposes and would definitely oppose any military action against Iran, saying that such action would create dangerous instability in the region.  &IRRITANTS8 TO U.S.-PAKISTAN RELATIONSHIP  11. (C) Majid then asked to make a few remarks about the U.S.-Pakistan relationship; he described it as excellent, but noted that occasionally there were some irritants, including:  -- Official U.S. statements that cast doubts on the sincerity of Pakistan's counter-terrorism efforts; -- Media reports and commentators who suggest Pakistan's nuclear weapons are not secure; -- U.S. government decisions to withhold reimbursements and to attach conditions, thus suggesting Pakistan is not a trustworthy partner; -- Criticisms of Pakistan's internal political decisions  Such comments and actions, Majid concluded, undermined the relationship and reflected a lack of understanding of Pakistan.  CODEL RAISES ISSUE OF MUSHARRAF,S ACTION AGAINST COURTS  12. (C) Specter and Kennedy thanked Majid for his frankness, but pointed out that recent political events in Pakistan, specifically Musharraf's removal of the Supreme Court and detention of the Chief Justice, had prompted serious concerns in the U.S. government regarding Pakistan's commitment to democratization.  Specter also pointed out that, while the U.S. government sometimes had internal disagreements, they did not result in dismissal of the Supreme Court.  13. (C) Majid countered that the U.S. Chief Justice was not engaged in petty political maneuvers and that the U.S. had taken 200 years to develop its current stable form of government.  Majid also observed that, in addition to engaging in partisan politics, the Supreme Court had released dangerous militants for political reasons. Sen. Specter agreed that such militants should not be at large, but pointed out that it appeared to many that Musharraf had taken action primarily to preserve his political power.  14. (C) Majid disagreed with this analysis strenuously, saying that the judiciary had reduced the government to a state of paralysis with its politically motivated decisions.  ISLAMABAD 00005411  003 OF 003   President Musharraf, he asserted, had been forced to take action.  15. (C) Majid added that some in the U.S. did not see \"the big picture\" in Pakistan, and how seemingly innocuous U.S. actions could negatively impact Pakistan and its economy, including security measures for U.S. officials in Pakistan and the issuance of travel advisories.  He said the USG needed a fuller awareness of the many issues with which Pakistan was grappling.  16. (U) This cable was drafted after the CODEL departed.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4369|07ISLAMABAD4817|07ISLAMABAD5266", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/15/2007 5:57", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005288  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2017 TAGS: PINR, PK, PREL, PTER SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY:  PAKISTAN: FIXING COALITION SUPPORT FUNDING  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5266 ISLAMABAD 4817      B. ISLAMABAD 4369  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) This is an action request, see Para 12.  This is a retransmission correcting text in Paragraph 10 of Ref A. Please refer only to this version of the cable.  2. (C)  SUMMARY.  Since 2002, the USG has reimbursed Pakistan over 5.3 billion USD for support to U.S. operations using Coalition Support Funds (CSF).  When pending claims are processed, that figure will likely exceed 5.6 billion USD. The CSF authorizing legislation was written soon after 9/11; six years down the road, we need Pakistan to more vigorously engage in the war on terror, but CSF is not working the way it should.  CSF is not reaching those parts of the GoP that are shouldering the load in GWOT operations.  Two clear examples of the problem are helicopter readiness and medical support to the Frontier Corps.  The readiness of Pakistan's helicopter fleet is poor.  Despite giving the GoP 55 USD million for helicopter operations over seven months, only 2 to 6 Pakistani Cobras are fully mission capable at a time they desperately need air power to fight spreading militancy.  Additionally, we have processed or will process reimbursement requests for 100 million USD over the year to support medical operations, but the Frontier Corps still does not receive basic medevac support.  Another consequence of the current system is political.  It fuels the internal argument that the USG is \"paying\" Pakistan to fight a U.S. war - this at a time when the Pakistanis need to accept the direct threat to their own security and sovereignty posed by al-Qaida, Taliban and extremist forces.  3.  (C)  Post has worked extensively with the GoP to increase GoP transparency and accountability.  What we have discovered is that we are receiving reimbursement requests for barbed wire and air defense radar systems that have no or marginal impact on the GWOT.  We recognize the legal and political sensitivities involved in developing a new approach, but the program, as it is currently being implemented, simply is not meeting U.S. or Pakistan counter-terrorism objectives.  This message outlines several ways forward.  In the meantime, DOD or CENTCOM should undertake an audit or program review of CSF.  END SUMMARY.  TARGETING CSF FUNDING TOWARD PAKISTAN AND U.S. STRATEGIC GOALS  4. (C) U.S. Public Law 109-289 (2206) authorizes CSF to reimburse Pakistan for logistical, military and other support provided to U.S. military operations.  Under this authorization, the U.S. has reimbursed Pakistan 5.3 billion USD since 2002.  When pending claims are processed, the total CSF reimbursement to Pakistan will exceed 5.6 billion USD. Pakistan receives nearly 90 percent of total CSF worldwide. While the December 8, 2003 guidance provided by the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) on parameters for reimbursements is broad, there have been multiple instances in which Post is confident funds have been diverted and that reimbursed claims figures have been seriously inflated.  A few examples:  -- HELICOPTER READINESS.  Pakistan received 55 million USD for helicopter operations from July 2006 to February 2007; however, Post estimates that as few as 3 Cobra Helicopters were fully mission capable as recently as 10 weeks ago.  Post is confident Army Aviation Command never received the 55 million.  -- MEDEVAC ASSISTANCE TO FRONTIER CORPS.  The Pakistan Army claimed 99 million USD over past 12 months for medical operations and the U.S. has paid or is in process of paying all/all submitted medical claims.   Yet, despite providing this plus fully funding 235 million USD CSF lease assistance for 26 new Bell 412 helicopters, the Inspector General of the Frontier Corps has repeatedly requested U.S. assistance in providing assets for medevac, obviously unaware of the resources the U.S. has provided.  --RADAR MAINTENANCE:  Between August 2006 and July 2007, Pakistan submitted claims for almost 70 million USD in ADA Radar Maintenance, although there is no enemy air threat  ISLAMABAD 00005288  002 OF 002   related to the war on terror.  --BARBED WIRE:  Between August 2006 and July 2007, we received a claim for 26 million USD in barbed wire and pickets.  While these items are no doubt helpful in protecting outposts, the claim figures are highly suspect.  5. (C)  Ambassador, the Office of Defense Representative and DOD officials have repeatedly raised CSF disbursement and other problems with the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and key military officials but have not received satisfactory responses.  In fact, recent correspondence from Pakistan leadership argues for additional funding to support increased operations.  6. (C) CSF reimbursement funds go directly into Pakistan,s general treasury -- from there we have no visibility on their final destination or application.  And we are not alone - based on our conversations with GoP officials, from President Musharraf down to the average Pakistani private, no one in Pakistan seems to have a clear grasp of the amount of US military reimbursement assistance actually provided.  7.  (C)  The CSF authorization legislation was drafted soon after 9/11.  Six years down the road, we still need Pakistan to engage more vigorously in the fight against extremism, but it is clear we also need to do a better job of making sure our monies are targeted to meet our counter-terrorism objectives.  POTENTIAL APPROACHES TO CSF REFORM  8. (C) Potential options to address CSF issues include the following:  (1) Stop approving Pakistan's CSF reimbursement requests until we receive adequate assurances on disbursement; (2) Earmark CSF monies for specific areas: maintenance, support, etc.; (3) Create a CSF \"trust fund\" that would allow the USG to control reimbursement and to obligate some funds for specific needs; or (4) Convert CSF into a direct cash transfer program.  9.  (C)  Option 1 would lead to a major political clash and damage our military to military relationship, just as we have the potential for greater cooperation under Chief of Army Staff General Kayani's leadership.  This would undermine the very purpose of CSF--to encourage the GoP to continue fighting militant extremism.  The Taliban, al Qaida and Islamic extremists represent a clear and growing danger to U.S. and Pakistani security and to regional stability.  As allies with forces in the region, we have a responsibility to strengthen and focus our assistance to improve their security forces' capabilities.  10.  (C) We understand DOD has determined Options 2, 3 and 4 would require asking Congress to amend the authorizing legislation.  Post could attempt to persuade Pakistan to concur with establishment of some form of \"trust\" mechanism - pointing out the alternative may be a severe reduction or loss of funding if Congress continues to see insufficient transparency and accountability.  In any event, a new approach is urgently required. We believe some variation of Options 2 and 3, which allow the USG to earmark at least some CSF monies for those Pakistani military elements of vital interest to us (helicopters, special forces and Frontier Corps), is the most logical and efficient approach.  CSF AUDIT/PROGRAM REVIEW  11. (C) Post repeats that we do not have visibility over the destination of CSF funds.  Accordingly, Post would welcome an audit or program review of the CSF process by CENTCOM or by DOD.  ACTION REQUEST  12.  (C)  Action Request:  Post would appreciate a front-channel response to the options proposed in para 8 and the proposal for an audit/review. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD4990|07ISLAMABAD5192", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/15/2007 9:46", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005289  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: STATE OF EMERGENCY LIFTED  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 4990      B. ISLAMABAD 5192  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (U) Summary:  As promised, President Musharraf has lifted the State of Emergency (SOE) and restored the constitution; he addresses the nation at 2000 local tonight.  The January 8 general elections can now proceed under an established legal framework.  However, the effects of the SOE linger on in the form of continued curbs on the media (Geo TV is still off the air) and restrictions on political gatherings.  The deposed judges and key politicians such as Aitzaz Ahsan remain under house arrest.  Musharraf also issued an order amending the National Command Authority to ensure that he, as President, will control Pakistan's nuclear weapons.  The Attorney General claims that this week's amendments to the constitution provide Musharraf with immunity for his recent actions, but it is possible that the next government will revisit the legality of the SOE, the Provisional Constitutional Order and the firing of Supreme and High Court judges.  Thus, the election results will continue to be critical in determining Musharraf's future and Pakistan's uneven progress towards democracy.  End summary.  New Orders -----------  2. (U) On December 15, President Musharraf lifted the state of emergency, which he imposed late November 3 in his capacity as (then) Chief of Army Staff.  Pakistan's Attorney General Malik Qayyum announced that the new orders included the concurrent Repeal of the November 3 State of Emergency (SOE), Provisional Constitution Order (PCO) and Revival of Constitutional Order.  Musharraf is scheduled to address the nation at (local) 2000 hours.  3. (SBU) Before giving up his unfettered powers, however, Musharraf introduced six more amendments to Pakistan's constitution.  Two of these new amendments are in response to the opposition's previous legal challenges to Musharraf's re-election.  The first amendment sanctions Musharraf's October 6 re-election before the National Assembly whose term expired on November 15. The opposition had argued in court that Musharraf could only be elected by the newly elected National Assembly.  The second amendment makes clear that Musharraf's new five-year term will count as his second (not third) time in office; again, the opposition had claimed in court that Musharraf had already served two terms and was therefore ineligible to serve a third term.  4. (C) The other four amendments are directly related to Pakistan's judiciary: (1) reiterating the establishment of an Islamabad High Court; (2) related details on appointments to the new Islamabad bench; (3) lowering the minimum age requirement from 45 to 40 for High Court judges; and (4) confirming all new judicial appointments made under the PCO. Judges who have ceased to hold office because they did not take an oath to the PCO will receive a pension and other benefits available to other judges.  Creating another court in Islamabad would relieve pressure on a crowded high court docket in Rawalpindi and allow the government to control the appointment of another high court justice.  The Attorney General admitted the government was having trouble filling the positions of deposed justices; lowering the age limit will make that process easier.  The deposed justices had argued that lifting the PCO would restore them to the bench, but amendment (4) makes clear that they have been definitively removed.  5. (C)  Those judges who took office after having taken an oath to the PCO have now re-taken an oath, this time to the constitution.  On December 10, Musharraf added three more judges to the Supreme Court, raising the total number of justices on the reconstituted bench to 14.  Justices Mian Hamid Farooq and Syed Sakhi Hussain Bokhari have been brought up from the Lahore High Court.  Justice Syed Zawwar Hussain Jaffrey was brought out of retirement from the Sindh High Court.  Under precedence, the Supreme Court has contained 17 justices, so more judges may be added.   ISLAMABAD 00005289  002 OF 002   Immunity for Musharraf ----------------------  6.  (C)  As noted in Ref A, the Attorney General has claimed that constitutional amendments promulgated on November 21 ensure that President Musharraf will not have to seek a two-thirds parliamentary ratification of his extra-constitutional actions on and since November 3.  Fundamental Rights Restored? ----------------------------  7. (C) According to public and private statements by Qayyum, Musharraf's orders would restore all constitutionally-protected \"fundamental rights\" and that all remaining political detainees would be released.  Former Punjab Chief Minister Pervaiz Elahi told CG Lahore that Aitzaz Ahsan would be released from house arrest December 15, but this has not yet occurred.  The deposed Supreme Court justices, including former Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, remain confined under house arrest \"to ensure the maintenance of public order.\"  8.  (U)  Despite lifting of the SOE, Geo TV remains off the air.  Nuclear Powers Asserted -----------------------  9. (C)  On December 14, Musharraf used his extra-constitutional powers to strengthen his powers as President to control Pakistan's nuclear weapons.  He issued an ordinance providing a legal mandate for the National Command Authority (NCA) and ensuring that the President commands the NCA.  The NCA was established in 2000 to provide a series of controls over Pakistan's special (nuclear) weapons programs.  The NCA as created includes an Employment Control Committee and a Development Control Committee, both chaired by the head of government (technically, the Prime Minister although Musharraf has been acting in that capacity within the NCA).  The Special Programs Division (SPD), headed by a military general, acts as the NCA's secretariat and implements the policies established by the NCA.  Musharraf's new ordinance gives the head of state (President) the chairmanship of both committees.  10. (C) Comment:  The good news is that Musharraf has followed through on his promise to lift the SOE and restore the constitution.  Musharraf and his party now hope that elections which will take place under the established legal framework can be considered credible.  The effects of the SOE linger on, however, in the form of continued repression of the media and limits imposed on political gatherings. Depending on the election results, the next government could revisit the legality of the SOE, the PCO and Musharraf's decision to replace Supreme and High Court judges. Musharraf's decision to ensure he as President retains control of Pakistan's nuclear weapons could set up a confrontation with the next Prime Minister over defense and foreign policy, but the nukes have always been, and remain, under the control of the Pakistan Army. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/18/2007 2:05", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005302  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: KFLU, TBIO, EAGR, AMGT, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN CONFIRMS FIRST CASES OF AVIAN INFLUENZA IN HUMANS   1. (SBU) Summary: The Pakistan National Institute of Health (NIH) confirmed on December 15 that six individuals have tested positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza (AI).  One of the confirmed AI patients died in hospital.  This marks the first reported cases of AI in humans in Pakistan.  World Health Organization (WHO) representatives are currently on the ground along with a Centers for Disease Control (CDC) medical epidemiologist.   A team from the Cairo-based U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU-3) is expected in country shortly.  End Summary.  2. (U) The text of the Ministry of Health press release is as follows:  Press Release: Ministry of Health Taking Necessary Action for the Control of Avian Influenza Outbreak in NWFP.  Islamabad, 15 December 2007: The National Institute of Health under the auspices of the Ministry of Health has tested patients and contacts suspected for Avian Influenza in late October, 2007.  Six cases were found positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza virus, five of them from Abbottabad and one from Mansehra district.  Five of them have fully recovered.  One of the confirmed cases died in hospital, while his brother who could not be tested has also died.  To avert the potential spread of this infection to humans, the Ministry of Health has implemented the following control activities:  -Investigation and sampling of case and contacts, and the organization of active surveillance for the early detection of infection. -Ensuring standard treatment to all detected cases and contacts. -Identification of isolation wards/rooms in all referral hospitals in the area and the nomination of focal persons to ensure proper case management and early notification of suspected cases. -Ensuring an early stock piling of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to ensure the necessary protection of health providers. -Ensuring a preliminary stock of osaltamivir for prophylaxis and treatment.  The Ministry of Health is undertaking these effective interventions in close collaboration with the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, the Health Department of the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), WHO and UNICEF.  The Ministry of Health will maintain this measure to ensure the health and well-being of the population and avert the threat from avian influenza in Pakistan.  3. (SBU) A team of three WHO epidemiologists, two from WHO headquarters in Geneva one from the WHO's Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, is currently in Islamabad.  The team is reviewing data from all confirmed and suspected cases and will monitor infection control measures at hospitals in Peshawar and Abbottabad, the sites of patient infection and hospitalization.  A medical epidemiologist from the influenza division of the CDC is currently in Islamabad and will work with the WHO team. Following a direct WHO request, a team from the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU-3) is en route from Cairo to assist in data collection and confirmation.  The team is scheduled to arrive in Islamabad on December 18.  Post continues to monitor the situation and will coordinate with the WHO and NAMRU-3 teams.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5160", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/18/2007 10:25", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005305  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN ELECTIONS: PREPARATION AND MONITORING  REF: ISLAMABAD 5160  1.  (SBU)  Summary.  December 15 was the last day for candidates to withdraw or change political parties in the run-up to Pakistan's January 8 parliamentary elections.  All the major parties will contest the election and are now heavily engaged in campaigning.  USG- and international donor-sponsored election preparation programs are winding down and observer/monitoring missions are moving into place. The U.S. Mission will field 31 observer teams and is coordinating with the UK, Canada and (hopefully) Japan to expand our reach.  We plan to include our expected congressional delegations into our observer teams.  Post is forwarding party allegations of vote rigging to the professionals in the IRI monitoring team.  We do not expect a clear winner on election day; it could take weeks for the parties to form a coalition government and choose a new prime minister.  This will mean an extended period of protracted uncertainty.  End Summary.  2.  (SBU)  This is one of a series of upcoming reports on the January 8 National Assembly and Provincial Assembly elections in Pakistan.  We will be providing in the next few weeks primers on the major political parties, profile bios of potential prime ministers, and continuing analyses of what is expected to be a close race among the major political parties.  At this point, it appears no single party will be able to form the next government in Pakistan.  The game will be coalition building among rival and often contentious parties and leaders.  Because it is unlikely there will be a clear winner, it could take weeks after the election for the parties to form a government and choose a new prime minister.  This will mean an extended period of protracted uncertainty.  3.  (SBU)  December 15 was the last day that candidates could withdraw or switch parties, so the final analysis of prospects for electoral districts is underway by all the political parties.  Overall, the Election Commission has approved 7,335 candidates for national and provincial assembly seats.  Only a handful of the smaller parties, including Qazi Hussain's Jamaat-e-Islami and Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek Insaaf decided in the end to boycott.  The big three -- Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party, Pervaiz Elahi's Pakistan Muslim League, and Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-N -- as well as Altaf Hussain's Muttahida Quami Movement and Fazlur Rehman's Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, are all now campaigning in earnest.  There will be a lull for the Eid holiday (December 20-22) and Mohammad Ali Jinnah's birthday (December 25); the biggest campaign push will take place in the last week before the January 8 elections.  According to law, the last day for campaigning is January 6.  Election Day Preparation/Planning ---------------------------------  4.  (SBU)  USG- and international donor-sponsored elections preparation programs are winding down.  The Asia Foundation is completing its voter education programs.  IFES and a USAID-funded contractor are completing work on placing the voter list on DVDs for distribution to the parties and on the Election Commission's website.  All of the 430,000 transparent ballot boxes purchased by the USG and Japan have been delivered to the Election Commission for dissemination across the country.  IRI distributed its latest pre-election poll to the political parties last week. The United Nations Development Program has already published and distributed comprehensive guide books for polling/returning officers and continues to train polling officials through December 31. NDI is finishing its political parties' poll watcher training.  5.  (SBU)  IRI is fielding its long-term monitors in seven hubs around the country; by election day, IRI will have 65 monitors on the ground.  IRI will be producing, within 48 hours after the polls close, an initial assessment of whether the elections were credible.  The EC has finally decided to go forward with its monitoring team of 50 long-term and possibly 30 short-term monitors. The Asia Foundation is in the process of accrediting up to 20,000 domestic observers.   ISLAMABAD 00005305  002 OF 002   6.  (SBU)  The U.S. Mission is fielding 31 election observer teams throughout the country.  We are coordinating with the UK (15 teams), the Canadians (20 teams) and (hopefully) the Japanese (6 teams).  We will establish a control center in the Embassy to coordinate mission observer teams and provide Washington with field updates on how election day activities are progressing.  The U.S. Mission is for observation and fraud prevention only; we will not/not be issuing any public statements on the credibility of the elections.  7.  (SBU)  As of now, we are expecting three congressional delegations and one staff delegation on election day.  We plan to include the delegations in our planned election observation missions in Islamabad, Peshawar, Lahore/Punjab, and (security permitting) Quetta.  Press Coverage --------------  8.  (SBU)  The GOP has announced it will establish a media election village near the Associated Press of Pakistan headquarters in Islambad.  Reportedly this will be a state of the art facility where journalists can file stories and receive their Election Commission accreditation to cover election reporting.  We expect significant numbers of U.S. and other international press.  9.  (SBU)  Although we expect the media gradually to ramp up to its pre-State of Emergency criticism of all politicians, the code of conduct that has been imposed on the media is creating self-censorship by both print and electronic media journalists.  Geo TV remains off the air.  Vote Rigging Allegations ------------------------  10.  (SBU)  Led by the Pakistan People's Party, virtually all the opposition parties are publicly complaining about vote rigging by the ruling Pakistan Muslim League party. Accusations include alleged bribing by the intelligence services, illegal transfers of judges who will monitor election returns, continued distribution of political spoils by district nazims (mayors), and reports of intimidation of opposition party workers by police and security services. Parties have complained the Election Commission is not responding.  11.  (SBU)  Post is forwarding reports of alleged abuses to the professional monitors in IRI for their assessment and inclusion in their election reports.  Restrictions on Campaigning/Voting ----------------------------------  12.  (SBU)  While most detained opposition political party workers have been freed, Aitzaz Ahsan and several of the deposed Supreme and High Court judges remain under house arrest.  The Election Commission's code of conduct for parties, coupled with the Ministry of Interior's own restrictions on large political gatherings (reftel), has so far restricted the ability of parties to hold big rallies. On the positive side, there have been no more suicide bombings of political rallies since the death of over 140 Pakistan People's Party workers in Karachi on October 18.  13.  (SBU)  It is still unclear the extent to which security concerns will prevent elections from taking place in Swat, Tank (Northwest Frontier Province) and several agencies (North and South Waziristan at the very least) in the Federally Administered Tribal Area.       PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/20/2007 7:31", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005328  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: EFIN, ECON, EINV, PREL, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN FACES FISCAL PROBLEMS DUE TO SWELLING DEFICIT  Summary -------  1.  (SBU) Summary:  High international oil and food prices and political unwillingness to decrease or eliminate subsidies in an election year are contributing to a projected increase in Pakistan's fiscal deficit from 4 to 4.9 percent for FY2008.  GOP expenditures on energy and food subsidies have risen over 100% since the July 1 beginning of the fiscal year. The biggest contributor is oil; prices at the pump have not increased since January 2007, while the international price of oil has increased over 50 percent.  The caretaker government has little power to take this issue on; the next government will find its options limited by a growing fiscal deficit.  If delays in making payments to the oil marketing companies continue, Pakistan may also have problems attracting future investments in oil and gas sector.  End summary.  Oil Subsidies -------------  2.  The last increase in gasoline prices was in January 2007, when international oil prices hovered around $55 per barrel.  In an election year, the GOP has made a deliberate decision to absorb the price differential.  The caretaker government (in power for approximately two months) has also taken a pass on resolving the problem, despite Ministry of Finance pleas to take action now. Pakistan's Finance Minister, Salman Shah has acknowledged publicly that fiscal deficit will rise significantly if this increase is not passed on. The Ministry of Finance has already revised its fiscal deficit projection to 4.6 % of GDP and believe that it may rise further to 4.9 % in a few months.  3.  (SBU)  In FY 2007-2008 the GOP budgeted $245 million in subsidies for the oil  marketing companies (OMCs) and refineries, projecting oil prices at $55 per barrel. With international oil prices now above $90 a barrel, the cumulative margin between market and pump prices cost the GOP approximately $473 million through November 2007. The GOP has already made payments of $213 million to the OMCs, but another $360 million is still outstanding. Chevron Pakistan alone is owed $53 million.  The Embassy has taken up Chevron's case with the Ministry of Finance so that the company can receive payment prior to the end of its fiscal year December 31. Chevron has put an anticipated $15 million investment on hold. (Note:  Chevron does not have any exploration activities in Pakistan, only downstream investments.  End note.)  Power Subsidies -------------------  4.  (SBU) The GOP budgeted $406 million in subsidies for the power sector in the FY 2007-08. Subsidies paid by October 2007 amounted to $246 million for the Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) and $62 million the Karachi Electric Supply Corporation (KESC). Ministry of Water and Power contacts told Econoffs that total subsidies by the end of the fiscal year expected to total $950 million, 133% higher than budgeted. The Ministry of Water and Power has asked the Federal Government to make arrangements for additional funds.  Wheat Subsidies ----------------  5. (SBU)  According to the Finance Ministry, the GOP placed nearly a million metric tons (mmt) in international wheat orders worth $450 million in November and December at an average cost of $450 per mmt, compared to domestic average price of $220 per mmt. The expected final cost to the government is approximately $250 million. The government continues to subsidize imported wheat to keep food inflation under control.  With food price inflation running over 10 percent annually, bread and butter issues remain the top concern in the minds of Pakistani voters.  Funding the deficit -------------------  6.  (SBU)  The Finance Ministry sources said that fiscal deficit stood at 1.6 percent of GDP versus the target of 0.9 percent for the first quarter (July-September 2007) of the current fiscal year, making it impossible to meet the overall fiscal year goal of four percent.  The oil and power subsidies were the major factors causing fiscal deficit to surpass the first quarter target. The full year fiscal deficit target of 4 percent of GDP is unlikely to be achieved  ISLAMABAD 00005328  002 OF 002   due to actual subsidies for oil and power exceeding planned and budgeted ones. The GOP's FY2007-08 budget assumed that oil prices would be $55 per barrel.  With crude oil prices ranging between $90 and $100 per barrel, the government is paying out energy subsidies of $230 million every month.  The caretaker economic team is very concerned, but not finding much GOP support for substantial price increases.  7. (SBU) The State Bank unsuccessfully tried to limit GOP's Central Bank borrowing, but could not stop the government from borrowing $2 billion from July through November 24, well in excess of the annual $704 million target. Excessive Central Bank borrowing is not only increasing inflationary pressures, but is also eroding the State Bank's financial position.  Comment --------  8.  (SBU) Comment:  The GOP should have been phasing in gasoline and power price increases throughout 2007, but could not find the political will.  The caretaker government, in power for only two months, is unlikely to make unpopular decisions affecting food or fuel prices ahead of the January elections.  As a result, the new government will face some tough choices -- either perpetuate the current subsidy regime with the negative budgetary and macroeconomic implications or spend some of its political capital to rein in subsidy spending.   Until now, Pakistan has had a good reputation for macroeconomic management, which has contributed significantly to its attractiveness as a destination for foreign capital.  It is not yet clear what economic policies a new government will pursue; most party election manifestos are long on fiscally untenable promises. The USG will need to stay engaged in close consultation with the GOP on economic policies.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07STATE149648", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/20/2007 12:23", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005336  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958:  N/A TAGS: PARM, PREL, MNUC, EFIN, KTFN, PK SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED ON FATF STATEMENT AND GUIDANCE ON IRAN  REF: STATE 149648  1. (SBU) On December 10, Econ Off informed officials at the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Americas Section of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) statement on Iran.  Officials at both ministries pledged that the USG points will be conveyed to relevant agencies of the Government of Pakistan (GOP). Ministry of Finance officials requested copies of FATF public statements regarding Iran, which Econ Off provided.  Ministry of Finance officials pledged to review the situation with the State Bank of Pakistan.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5302", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 2:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005349  SIPDIS   E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/21/2017 TAGS: KFLU, TBIO, EAGR, AMGT, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: INDEPENDENT TESTING CONFIRMS ONE HUMAN FATALITY OF AVIAN INFLUENZA, OTHERS CASES IN DOUBT  REF: ISLAMABAD 5302  Classified by: Ambassador Patterson for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)   1. (C) Summary: Independent testing conducted by microbiologists from the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU3) confirms that one individual who died from respiratory failure tested positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza (AI). NAMRU is unable to obtain viable samples from two other cases, of which one was a fatality. All other suspected cases have tested negative for AI.  Pakistani health authorities had previously announced that six individuals, out of eight suspected cases, had tested positive for avian influenza.  There is not a consensus among Pakistani and international health experts as to whether or not human-to-human transmission of the virus has occurred.  End Summary.  2. (SBU) The Pakistan National Institute of Health (NIH) publicly stated on December 15 that six individuals tested positive for H5N1 Avian Influenza (AI). Included in the six was one fatality, Pakistan's first confirmed human case of AI (Reftel).  The World Health Organization (WHO) announced on December 15 that Pakistan had informed the WHO of eight suspected cases.  3. (SBU) Investigation of the outbreak focused on nine individuals. The first, also known as the Index case, was hospitalized in Peshawar with flu-like symptoms in late October 2007.  He had been involved in the culling of diseased chickens in a poultry farm near Abbottabad, north of Islamabad.  The patient recovered and was discharged. Pakistani health authorities reported that he tested positive for an H5 influenza strain.  Three of his brothers, all of whom had close contact with the index patient during his illness, were hospitalized with respiratory ailments in November.  The first brother died on November 19 and was not tested prior to his burial.  The second brother died on November 28 and tested positive for H5N1.  A third brother reportedly tested positive for AI but recovered and was released from the hospital. Pakistani health authorities also reported that a doctor who cared for the brothers, as well as a male cousin of the diseased, both tested positive for the virus.  Active surveillance of chicken farms around the site of the October culling indicated three additional individuals suffering from flu-like symptoms, all of whom suffered mild symptoms are reportedly tested positive for the virus.  4. (SBU) A team of three WHO epidemiologists, two from WHO headquarters in Geneva and one from the WHO's Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, traveled to Islamabad to assist the Pakistani National Institute of Health in investigating the cases.  A medical epidemiologist from the influenza division of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), coincidently in Islamabad at the time of the outbreak, also joined the team.  Following a direct WHO request, a Cairo-based team from the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit 3 (NAMRU3) arrived in Pakistan on December 20 to re-test all available samples.  5. (C) NAMRU 3 researchers reported to EconOff that H5N1 was confirmed in one of the cases, the second brother of the index patient, who died of respiratory failure on November 28.  NAMRU was unable to test viable samples from the index case or the November 19 fatality.  Samples from all other suspected cases tested negative for H5N1 avian influenza.  A WHO-collaborating lab in London also retested the samples and confirmed NAMRU 3 findings on December 25. Samples are being forwarded to the NAMRU 3 lab in Cairo for full genetic sequencing.  Neither the WHO nor NAMRU will release this data until the Pakistan Ministry of Health announces the test results.  As of December 26, the Government of Pakistan has not released a statement on the WHO/NAMRU findings.  6. (C) Comment: NAMRU microbiologists report that there is no consensus among the NIH and WHO as to whether human-to-human transmission occurred in this instance.  According to the NAMRU team, there is no scientific evidence to indicate that the virus was transmitted between individuals.  However, according to the NAMRU team, the one confirmed AI fatality did not have prolonged contact with diseased poultry and may have been infected by his brother, the index case.  Without viable samples from the index case or the November 19 fatality, it will be difficult for health officials to ascertain whether or not limited human-to-human transmission of the virus occurred.  Local and international health experts currently on the ground in Pakistan agree that there have been no new recent cases.  According to health authorities, the outbreak seems to have been limited and did not spread to neighboring poultry farms, nor did it spread directly from family to family. Post remains in contact with all relevant parties and will report any new findings or public statements on the case. End Comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07KARACHI728", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 14:55", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005358  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SITREP 1: BHUTTO KILLED BY RALLY BOMB BLAST  REF: KARACHI 728  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) At about 1800 hours (local) December 27, Benazir Bhutto suffered fatal injuries while departing a campaign rally outside of Rawalpindi.  Initial reports from the scene stated a suicide bomber, carrying four kilos of explosives, approached Bhutto's vehicle as she was getting in to depart. Bhutto was rushed to Rawalpindi General Hospital, where she was declared dead within minutes after arrival, possibly while in surgery.  As many as 20 other PPP supporters were killed and 42 injured.  2. (C) Comment: It is unclear how the public, especially PPP supporters, will react, but there are early reports of sporadic street violence in Lahore and Rawalpindi, cars being burned and posters torn down.  Embassy and Consulates will hold immediate EAC meetings at 2000 hours (local).  The British High Commission has decided to close its Karachi mission tomorrow (December 28).  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5358", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 17:33", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005359  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL SUBJECT: SITREP 2: BHUTTO, FAMILY TO LARKHANA; MUSHARRAF ADDRESSES NATION; DEMONSTRATIONS CONTINUE  REF: ISLAMABAD 5358  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Bhutto's December 27 assassination caused immediate reactions throughout Pakistan: Musharraf addressed the nation calling for calm, while PPP supporters spontaneously rallied, causing damage to cars and select buildings.  Bhutto's body will likely be moved to Larkhana (Bhutto's ancestral home) tonight, and Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari should arrive in Karachi from Dubai very soon. CoDel Specter will tentatively depart early (tomorrow morning); other Codels are encouraged to postpone travel to Post.  End summary.  2. (U) Rawalpindi General Hospital confirmed that Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto was fatally injured by a bullet wound to her neck.  3. (U) Musharraf addressed the nation at about 2100 hours (local) to offer his public condolences for the Bhutto loss. He asked for calm across the country and vowed that the terrorists behind the assassination would be brought to justice, saying \"Terrorists pose the greatest threat to Pakistan.\"  4. (U) Following an emergency cabinet meeting, the GOP declared three days of mourning.  The PPP is calling for 40 days of mourning (through February 5).  5. (U) Spontaneous demonstrations, including sporadic violence and arson, by PPP supporters have broken out throughout the country.  Large groups have gathered in Lahore (in front of the Press Club, near CG Lahore), Peshawar, Karachi, Quetta and Sialkot.  Cars and some buildings (banks, a police station, Pakistan Muslim League (PML-Q) party offices) have been smashed and set on fire.  6. (U) Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, and one of the Bhutto daughters is en route to Karachi from Dubai and are expected to arrive before morning.  Bhutto's body may be moved to Larkhana (Sindh), the Bhutto family's ancestral home, tonight.  7. (C) CODEL Specter (Senator Arlen Specter, Congressman Patrick Kennedy) will cut short their visit, tentatively departing December 28 morning.  Senator Specter, Congressman Kennedy and Ambassador laid a condolence wreath at the PPP's Central Secretariat Headquarters in Islamabad.  Codel Voinovich, expected to arrive December 30, has been advised to postpone their trip.  8. (SBU) Embassy held an EAC meeting at 2000 hours (local) (septel). PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 19:11", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005361  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: CODEL SPECTER'S MEETING WITH PRESIDENT MUSHARRAF  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1.  (C)  Summary.  In a December 27 meeting with Codel Specter, President Musharraf outlined ongoing Pakistani efforts to fight extremism, expressed support for increased IMET funding, and defended his decision to impose a state of emergency.  Senator Specter pressed for Pakistan to capture Usama bin Laden; Specter and Congressman Kennedy expressed concern about the continued detention of judges and the importance of an independent judiciary and free and fair elections.  End summary.  2.  (C)  Senator Arlen Specter, Congressman Patrick Kennedy, Ambassador and Polcouns (notetaker) met December 27 with President Musharraf in his Islamabad residence.  Musharraf was accompanied by General Shafkat and his new Private Secretary Mohsin Hafeez.  SIPDIS  3. (C)  Senator Specter opened the meeting by noting the U.S. values the close bilateral relationship with Pakistan and appreciates Islamabad's support in the war on terror.  He asked the President if he knew where Usama bin Laden as hiding.  4.  (C)  Congressman Kennedy noted that the recent conditions attached to U.S. military assistance should be seen only as a means to ensure that our funding is going where it needs to go--to help the Pakistani military fight the war on terror. The U.S. fully recognized that Pakistan has lost over 1,000 troops to extremists and we wanted to ensure transparency in funding so that the military could better do its job. Kennedy expressed strong support for the IMET program to build military relationships and promote democracy.  He also said that many in the U.S. were concerned that the Pakistani elections would be rigged and asked how Musharraf planned to ease the transition to the new government.  5.  (C)  Musharraf expressed satisfaction that the bilateral relationship was now broader and more long-term than it had been in the past.  There had been an unfortunate gap in IMET support during the Pressler amendment years but now \"the sky is the limit\" on how we should expand the program to improve military training and capabilities.  Saying that conditions \"do not go well here,\" Musharraf expressed concern that conditions placed on U.S. aid were seen in Pakistan as a lack of U.S. trust.  6.  (C)  Reimbursements for costs on the war on terror (note: Coalition Support Funds) were analyzed and mutually agreed; there could be no question that the funds were getting to the military.  Citing a previous concern about maintenance of the Pakistani Cobra helicopter fleet, Musharraf said that several months ago only one of 20 Cobras was operational.  This was a serious problem as Pakistan needed these Cobras to fight air/ground operations against terrorists.  The problem, he said, was that Pakistan was not as well organized about maintenance as they should have been, but it was not an issue of the money not going where it was intended.  Musharraf said the Army now has taken action to correct the problem.  7.  (C)  On terrorism, Musharraf said that Pakistan was fighting al Qaeda and the Taliban, both in the tribal border areas and now into the settled areas of the country.  They were suffering from a growing number of suicide bombings as well, and they traced the source of almost all these bombings to militant leader Baitallah Mehsud in Waziristan.  Mehsud was providing training and logistical support for terrorists in Pakistan and across the border into Afghanistan.  The Army had been engaging in tough action in Swat.  Specter asked about bin Laden, and Musharraf replied that he could be in Bajaur Agency (in the Federally Administered Tribal Area), where government forces currently could not operate. Musharraf mused that if operations in Swat could be wrapped up, the Army might move to North and South Waziristan to eliminate Mehsud and then go on to Bajaur.  There were approximately 100,000 troops in the area now; this was the result of shifting two divisions from the northern border. They were raising 12 wings of the Frontier Corps which should be equipped and ready to fight by December 31.  But the Army was increasingly overstretched so the plans would take time to implement.  8.  (C)  Leading into a discussion of the state of emergency,  ISLAMABAD 00005361  002 OF 002   Specter said that all people in public life were subject to both fame and ridicule, and he recognized that Pakistan was not the U.S.  But imposing a state of emergency, arresting judges, restricting the media, and keeping the Chief Justice under house arrest were events that caused concern in the U.S.  Our Supreme Court tells our President things he doesn't want to hear.  An independent media and judiciary were important for democracy.  9.  (C)  Musharraf agreed that, technically, a free media and judiciary were important for a democracy.  But Pakistan was not as stable as the U.S.  If the choice was between disintegration and democracy, the integrity of the state had to come first.  The Chief Justice was corrupt, he engaged in nepotism, and he interfered in cases for personal reasons. Then he went further and interfered on issues affecting the country and the economy, preventing privatization in one case from moving forward.  Musharraf said he began hearing appeals from the Prime Minister, the police and other government officials asking to put a stop to the Chief Justice's politically motivated actions.  At first, Musharraf said he made a blunder by not acting out of concern over criticism on human rights grounds.  But eventually Musharraf filed a case of misconduct, as is legally outlined, with the Supreme Judicial Council and suspended the Chief Justice.  Instead of allowing the Council to rule on the matter, the Supreme Court reinstated former Chief Justice Chaudhry, in violation of the procedures outlined in the Constitution.  10.  (C)  Musharraf stated that he imposed a state of emergency because the government was almost paralyzed, the law enforcement community was demoralized and the Court was letting terrorist go free.  The Court had ordered the re-opening of the Red Mosque in Islamabad after the Army had been forced to launch a military operation to shut down terrorist activities there.  The economy was suffering due to the Court's actions.  Then the Court challenged the will of the National Assembly when it voted to re-elect Musharraf. The Court began hearing cases into Musharraf's eligibility for re-election and the issue became increasingly politicized.  The first bench was composed of seven judges; when it became clear to the Chief Justice that the verdict would support Musharraf, the bench was extended to nine and eventually eleven judges.  Musharraf said before imposing the state of emergency he consulted with the military, the business community and the cabinet; all agreed the Chief Justice had to be stopped.  Musharraf said his staff was preparing a full explanation in response to a letter he had received from the American Bar Association.  11.  (C)  Kennedy asked about the remaining detainees, and Musharraf said there were only a few still under house arrest.  Yes, Musharraf volunteered, this included Aitzaz Ahsan, who had been released only to immediately start organizing lawyers' protests again; this was not acceptable, so Ahsan was re-arrested.  12.  (C)  Musharraf had another event at attend, but he closed the meeting by saying that his priority issues were fighting terrorism, maintaining economic growth and encouraging democracy.  Democracy was the only way forward for the future and Pakistan must have free and fair elections.  13.  (U)  Codel Specter did not have an opportunity to clear this message.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/27/2007 19:13", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005362  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, SNAR, PTER SUBJECT: CODEL SPECTER MEETS WITH AFGHAN PRESIDENT HAMID KARZAI  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b)  1. (C) Summary: Codel Specter had an impromptu meeting with visiting Afghan President Hamid Karzai December 27 in Islamabad.  Karzai was extremely courteous and thanked Senator Specter and Representative Kennedy for continued USG assistance to Afghanistan.  Karzai described his December 26 meeting with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf as \"positive,\" and expressed his hope that \"Pakistan-Afghanistan ties will improve in the months to come.\"  Notably, Karzai did not avail himself of the opportunity to lambast either Pakistan or Musharraf to this visiting Codel.  End summary.  USG Assistance --------------  2. (C) Visiting U.S. Senator Arlen Specter and U.S. Congressman Patrick Kennedy, accompanied by DCM, met December 27 in Islamabad with Afghan President Hamid Karzai.  Karzai had just concluded his own meetings with the GOP.  3. (C) Karzai opened the meeting with effusive praise for USG assistance to his country.  He pointed out that Afghanistan had come a long way since 2001 and will continue to progress with USG help.  The CoDel reacted positively to Karzai's comments.  They inquired into which types of projects worked best and whether additional USG assistance would be required.  Karzai specifically cited USG-sponsored road construction as having led to enhanced economic activity in his country and increased wealth for his citizenry in general.  Counterterrorism Cooperation ----------------------------  4. (C) Turning to a question on the effectiveness of joint counterterrorism initiatives in the region, Karzai responded that his December 26 meeting with Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf was \"extremely positive.\"  He added that Pakistan-Afghanistan relations \"had entered a new era.\"  5. (C) Karzai further explained that Pakistan had begun to suffer the effects of Talibanization, which would prompt it to cooperate more fully with Afghanistan.  In his view, however, \"the Taliban posed no long-term strategic threat to Afghanistan, but successfully thwarting the Taliban would require greater, sustained Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation.\"  Karzai concluded, \"This will now happen.\"  6. (C) Asked for suggestions on how best to defeat the Taliban, Karzai noted that the group did not enjoy popular support in Afghanistan.  Repeating an earlier point, Karzai stressed that economic development in his country would defeat the Taliban.  Karzai made a special effort to provide the CoDel with a positive assessment of Afghanistan's economic conditions, claiming that wealth was indeed being created.  He emphasized that defeating the Taliban would require \"time and Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation.\"  7. (C) Responding to a specific question about the multilateral effort to capture Osama bin Laden, Karzai expressed confidence at its eventuality.  Karzai quickly noted that bin Laden's continued freedom was not for lack of a concerted effort by all involved parties.  He also pointed out that Coalition forces had been close numerous times in capturing bin Laden.  Counternarcotics Efforts ------------------------  8. (C) In response to Representative Kennedy's question on domestic drug use in Afghanistan, Karzai professed that his government recognized the domestic drug use problem as a national issue.  It had recently been discussed in a cabinet meeting, claimed Karzai.  He estimated that as many as 100,000 Afghanis were users of illicit drugs.  He felt the problem was actually getting worse, exacerbated by Afghani refugees recently returned from Iran.  9. (C) Karzai responded warmly to Representative Kennedy's suggestion that he invite to Afghanistan a bipartisan Congressional delegation specifically to discuss the drug use problem as a national and international issue.   ISLAMABAD 00005362  002 OF 002   Engaging Iran -------------  10. (C) Turning to Senator Specter's question on how best to deal with Iran's nuclear aspirations, Karzai insisted that more dialogue was needed.  Karzai added, \"confrontation will not work.\"  Instead, the USG (and international community) must find ways to engage Iran.  Karzai explained that the acquisition of nuclear weapons for a country in this region was much more than a strategic issue, it bolsters national pride as well as creating a sense of safety regarding national security.  11. (C) Senator Specter asked for Karzai's views on how best to encourage Iran to engage in a dialogue with the U.S. Karzai responded that it would be hard but that we should remember that the Iranian population was not anti-U.S. by nature.  Senator Specter then proposed a possible \"parliamentary exchange\" between the U.S. and Iran to promote engagement with Iran.  12. (C) Comment: While we will wait to see what, if any, positive and proactive steps either side actually takes to enhance the level of cooperation between the two governments, we are cautiously encouraged by the fact that President Karzai did not use this private meeting to lambast either Pakistan or President Musharraf personally to a captive Congressional audience.  End comment.  13. (U) This cable has not been cleared by Codel Specter.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5359", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 11:24", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005380  SIPDIS  NOFORN SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, ASEC, CASC, PINR, KFLO, MARR, AMGT SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 3: BHUTTO'S FUNERAL; PROTESTS EXPECTED AFTER PRAYERS  REF: ISLAMABAD 5359  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: The GOP transported the body of slain Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto to Larkana, where funeral services are taking place as of 1430 hours December 28.  Violent sporadic protests occurred throughout the country well into the night of December 27. Pakistan was relatively quiet the morning of December 28, but violence and demonstrations, particularly in Karachi and other areas of Sindh, resumed after Friday afternoon prayers.  Caretaker Interior Minister Nawaz said there would be no new state of emergency declared; Punjab's Caretaker Chief Minister has appointed two separate committees to investigate the Rawalpindi attack.  Caretaker Prime Minister Soomro announced that elections would be held as scheduled on January 8, but Nawaz Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League-N party has declared it will boycott.  Post is appealing the decision of the International Republican Institute's board to cancel its elections monitoring mission because of security concerns.  The European Commission's observation mission may follow suit on December 31.  All mission personnel are safe and accounted for.  End summary.  Funeral -------  2. (U) The GOP provided a C-130 and helicopters to transport the body of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto from Rawalpindi to her home in Larkana (Sindh). Bhutto's funeral is taking place as of 1430 hours (local) December 28.  PPP members on the scene and live TV coverage reported general chaos as grief-stricken mourners surrounded the house, grounds and family mausoleum.  3. (C) Security and logistical concerns prevented the Ambassador from attending the funeral.  The Ambassador plans to travel to Larkana as soon as possible to convey condolences to the family.  No Emergency/Investigation --------------------------  4. (U) Caretaker Interior Minister Hamid Nawaz said publicly that \"there is no possibility of imposition of emergency again in the country.\"  Meanwhile, Punjab provincial Caretaker Chief Minister Ejaz Nisar appointed two committees to investigate Bhutto's assassination: one led by a Lahore High Court justice and the other led by the province's Additional Inspector General of the Criminal Investigation Department.  All media are reporting that al Qaeda has claimed responsibility for the attack.  5. (C) The Ambassador called Chief of Army Staff General Kayani to urge the GOP to provide the maximum security possible for the Bhutto family.  Protests --------  6. (SBU) Throughout the night of December 27, PPP supporters across the country conducted spontaneous violent demonstrations, burning select government buildings, banks and shops, as well as transportation links and vehicles. Pakistan's cities were relatively quiet the morning of December 28 as the GOP had declared a three-day mourning period and government offices, shops, banks and the stock exchange were closed.  However, more demonstrations are expected after Friday afternoon prayers.  The Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) parties have called for a general strike nationwide.  7. (C) CG Karachi reports continued looting in some Karachi neighborhoods (including near the consulate) and protests by funeral mobs in Larkana.  The Pakistan Army has been called out in Karachi, Hyderabad, Sukkur and Larkana.  At least six people have been killed; the Sindh Rangers have been given permission to shoot to kill to control mobs.  The Indus  ISLAMABAD 00005380  002 OF 002   Highway between Hyderabad and Larkana has been blocked at several places by mobs.  Karachi Airport is closed except for international flights by foreign-flag carriers.  A \"wheel-jam\" strike has been called for Sindh province; this means mobs will prevent any vehicles from moving in areas where the strike is being observed.  Eighteen Toyota trucks purchased by State/INL for the Frontier Corps were destroyed when the train carrying them was attacked near Larkana.  8. (C) CG Peshawar reports angry demonstrations in several parts of Peshawar, including around the old city, and in Dera Ismail Khan district.  Crowds have set fire to the offices of the ruling PML and MQM parties.  9. (C) CG Lahore reports isolated, small demonstrations in various parts of the city.  Elections ---------  10. (C)  Caretaker Prime Minister Soomro announced elections will be held as scheduled on January 8.  Nawaz Sharif announced that his Pakistan Muslim League-N party will boycott the elections.  Contrary to some press reports, ruling coalition partner Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) in-country leader Farooq Sattar stressed December 28 that his party had not yet decided whether to boycott the elections.  11. (C) The International Republican Institute's (IRI) Pakistan office reported to Post that its Washington-based board of directors has decided to withdraw from country their 22 long-term observers and will cancel the full 65-person election observer mission.  Their primary concern was security.  Post has appealed this decision, arguing that the security situation should be evaluated over and after the next three days of mourning.  12. (C) The European Commission's Chief Election Observer met with EU countries' chiefs of mission December 28 morning, when the U.K., the Netherlands, Sweden and France were able to postpone a decision on canceling the observation mission until December 31.  Some European countries may now be advocating a delay of the January 8 general elections.  13. (C) CG Lahore met with Pakistan Muslim League leader Pervez Elahi, Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz leader Shahbaz Sharif, and Supreme Court Bar Association President Aitzaz Ahsan (septels) to urge that elections proceed as scheduled with full participation of the parties.  Other -----  14. (U) The Karachi Stock Exchange closed today.  It, along with all banks and most other businesses throughout Sindh, will remain closed (\"shuttered down\") until December 31. MarketWatch reported that Standard & Poor's Ratings Services announced that Pakistan's sovereign credit ratings could be lowered \"if the assassination of Benazir Bhutto precipitates heightened levels of violence and political turmoil.\"  15. (U) Codel Specter departed this morning.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 12:59", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 005382  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  DEPT FOR OPS CENTER, SCA  EMBASSY ISLAMABAD REQUESTS THAT THIS MESSAGE RE RELEASED AS AN IMMEDIATE ALDAC TELEGRAM.  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: OTRA, AMGT, ASEC, PK SUBJECT:  INSTRUCTIONS TO DEFER FOR THE NEXT 72 HOURS NON-ESSENTIAL TRAVEL TO PAKISTAN   1.  AmEmbassy Islamabad requests all non-essential travel to Pakistan be deferred for the next 72 hrs (until 31 December, after 1800 HRS local time, or 0800 HRS Eastern Standard Time).  This is a precautionary measure because, in the aftermath of the death of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, there are widespread traffic problems and protests along the roads between Pakistan's posts in Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore and Peshawar and their respective airports.  Given the current difficulties in reaching those airports, Pakistan's posts cannot provide the necessary support for airport arrivals and departures.  2. Mission Pakistan appreciates that some inbound travelers may be inconvenienced by the need to reschedule travel, but prudence dictates we adopt this precautionary measure.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 13:30", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005383  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO'S ASSASSINATION: THE DAY AFTER  REF: ISLAMABAD  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C)  Summary.  Benazir Bhutto's family and supporters are consumed with funeral and mourning ceremonies, but the struggle for party leadership between Benazir's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, and PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem has begun. The USG is perceived as being the power behind Bhutto's return to Pakistan, and Faheem's supporters already are touting the Secretary's December 27 call as evidence of USG support for his leadership in the party.  We believe that intervention with Nawaz Sharif to argue against a boycott would be well-received by both the government and the PPP. We anticipate that the current violence will subside in most of Pakistan after the three-day mourning period ends.  End Summary.  2.  (U)  Pakistan this morning is reeling with shock and gloom over the December 27 assassination of Pakistan People's Party leader Benazir Bhutto.  The funeral began at 1430 local time in Larkana; the GOP sent a C-130 and helicopters to transfer Bhutto's body from Rawalpindi to Larkana.  Benazir's husband, Asif Ali Zardari and Benazir's three children arrived last night.  Bhutto has been interred next to her father, Zulfikar, and the scene at the family home in Larkana is chaotic as grief-stricken supporters are swarming the house, grounds and family mausoleum.  3.  (C)  Following sporadic violence across Pakistan last night, attacks on vehicles, banks and government offices continued today, particularly in Bhutto's home province of Sindh and in Balochistan.  The GOP declared a three-day mourning period so government offices, shops, banks and the stock exchange are closed.  The media is reporting al Qaeda has claimed credit, but much of PPP supporters' anger and frustration is being directed at government-related targets because they blame the GOP for not providing Bhutto with adequate security.  The fact that Bhutto, a Sindhi, was killed in the Punjab will be played out in inter-provincial rivalries for years to come.  4.  (C)  We expect violence to continue during the three-day mourning period in major cities, and probably for several more days in Karachi and other parts of Sindh.  Several commentators noted that the attack on Bhutto took place in Liaquat Bagh, a field where Pakistan's first Prime Minister was assassinated in 1951 and a government paramilitary force attacked a political rally in 1973; it is near where Benazir's father was hung by President Zia in 1979.  Although today's press coverage provided fairly balanced obituaries describing Bhutto's strengths and weaknesses, we expect she will increasingly be idolized in the coming days.  It is important to remember that Benazir, her father and her two brothers were all murdered; to Pakistanis, the family is akin to the Kennedys, and the people need to vent their national grief.  Here, grief often translates into violent acts, but it remains to be seen whether the current violence will carry over into the new year and the scheduled elections.  PPP Leadership Vacuum ---------------------  5.  (C)  Bhutto's death 12 days before the general election leaves the party in a serious quandry, and there are already signs of a power struggle.  Bhutto's demanding and autocratic style left little room for competitors to emerge, so most PPP leadership skills are as yet untested.  The main contenders for party leadership are Benazir's husband, Zardari, and PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem.  Another possibility is Aitzaz Ahsan, the lawyer who defended the former Chief Justice and is now President of the Supreme Court Bar Association.  6.  (C)  PPP is a family-based feudal party that has been living on the legacy of former Prime Minister Zulfakir Bhutto and now his daughter Benazir.  Therefore, the natural choice for Benazir's successor would be a direct family member. However, Benazir's sister Sanam has shunned politics, and Benazir's children are too young (aged 18, 17 and 14). Zardari, although unpopular with party rank and file, could be considered as a placeholder at least until one of the children takes over.  Zardari comes with a great deal of  ISLAMABAD 00005383  002 OF 003   baggage, so much so that he did not return to Pakistan with Benazir when she returned from exile in October.  He has spent 11 years in and out of prison, charged but never convicted of crimes ranging from blackmail and extortion to murder.  He is known as \"Mr. Ten-Percent\" because of his alleged corruption during Benazir's terms as Prime Minister. Zardari reportedly is in poor health with diabetes, heart trouble and spinal injuries.  But he was particularly vocal in accusing the GOP of complicity after the October 18 bombing of Bhutto's welcome home rally in Karchi; he is likely to repeat his attacks on the GOP in the next few days.  7.  (C)  Faheem was the PPP in-country leader during Bhutto's eight years of self-imposed exile; he is a senior parliamentarian, former Minister of Communications (1993-2002) and Housing (1993-1996) and he competed for Prime Minister with the PML's Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain in 2004. Faheem is well-respected in PPP party circles and is known as a completely loyal Bhutto supporter.  He is moderate and secular. He leads a spiritual group which promotes the peaceful Sufi values of Islam (while enjoying an occasional bloody mary).  Importantly for a Sindh-based party, he is from Hala in Sindh.  But Faheem is known as a weak leader with little of the charisma needed to lead an emotionally devastated party as a Prime Minister.  8.  (C)  Ahsan is undoubtedly PPP's most brilliant mind and strategist.  He was the only Pakistani politician to capitalize on the March suspension of the former Chief Justice by organizing nation-wide rallies, and he mounted a stirring defense of the former Chief Justice in court. But Bhutto, then seeking a deal with Musharraf, did not endorse Ahsan's campaign and she barely approved his candidacy for re-election.  Ahsan has been hedging his bets, including by meeting with Nawaz Sharif in London earlier this year.  Ahsan also was considered the strategist who convinced the former Chief Justice to goad Musharraf into declaring a state of emergency.  Ahsan has since cast his lot with the lawyers; he withdrew his candidacy for re-election on December 15.  Our PPP contacts do not believe the party will adopt the controversial Ahsan as a leader because he had all but split with Bhutto prior to her death.  With Bhutto gone, however, Ahsan may well form a splinter party in the future.  Elections on Schedule? ---------------------  9.  (C)  Faheem announced December 27 that the PPP would adopt a 40 day period of mourning; all parties have suspended campaigning for the three-day mourning period announced the government.  All the PPP leaders are engaged in funeral/mourning so they have made no public statements on whether they will continue with elections.  However, analysts believe that the \"grief factor\" will enhance the PPP's chances in the upcoming elections.  Some observers have proposed a delay, but a delay is likely to expose the PPP leadership battle and over time create doubts about the party's ability to deliver all-important electoral perks.  10.  (C)  Shahbaz Sharif told CG Lahore (septel) that, indeed, the PML-N intends now to boycott the election.  The PML is still playing a dangerous game of hoping to undermine the credibility of the elections and promote street protests that require the Army to step in and restore order.  Despite public proclamations against the military's role in politics, Nawaz knows that this is the only way to deliver on his goal of ousting Musharraf.  11.  (C)  If Nawaz's PML-N party does boycott the elections, the most likely result will be to clear the field for Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi, the PML candidate, to become the next Prime Minister.  Before Bhutto's assassination, PML and PML-N share a center-right power base in the critical Punjab, and they were headed towards splitting the vote to Bhutto's benefit.  Some PLM-N members may contest despite the boycott.  12.  (C)  Musharraf reportedly will call an All Parties Conference in the coming days to consult with political parties on the way forward for elections.  At a minimum, there will be no more big rallies in the few remaining campaign days, and the government will have to use additional Army/police forces to maintain security on election day.  The  ISLAMABAD 00005383  003 OF 003   All Parties Conference could conclude that it is better to delay elections.  13.  (C)  Comment: The President's message of condolence and condemnation has been well received, but contacts caution that we wait until the three-day mourning period ends before engaging the PPP on political decisions. The USG is perceived as being the power behind Bhutto's return to Pakistan, and Faheem's supporters in the PPP already are touting the Secretary's December 27 call as evidence of USG support for  SIPDIS his leadership in the party.  However, we believe that intervention with the PML-N to argue against a boycott would be well-received by the government and the PPP.    PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 13:35", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L ISLAMABAD 005384  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES BHUTTO ASSASSINATION WITH NSA AZIZ  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)   1. (C)  Ambassador and DCM met NSA Tariq Aziz December 28 to discuss the GOP's reaction to the assassination of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto.  Aziz made the following points:  2.  (C)  The GOP will defer to the PPP on whether to proceed on schedule with the election.  Aziz said they will wait for the PPP to meet later this weekend after the three day mourning period and abide by the party's wishes as to whether or not to go forward.  3. (C)  The GOP has a phone intercept that has the Bhutto's killers boasting of their success to militant leader Baitullah Mehsood. The government plans to release the tape as well as a video of the actual bomb blast to the media. They have also reconstructed the face of the actual bomber who took three shots at Benazir before the bomb went off. The GOP claims that none of the shots hit Benazir and that she was killed by a the force of the explosive slamming her against the armor on the car.  She was standing up in the sunroof when the bomb went off.  All other occupants of the car survived with little or no injuries.  4.  (C) ISI director General Taj had a long (two hour) friendly meeting with Benazir the night before the bombing. They were discussing the way forward.  The meeting broke up at 2 am.  Aziz indicated they were making progress towards some sort of election arrangement  5.  (C)  The two likely candidates for leadership of the PPP are Benazir's husband Asif Ali Zardari and PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem.  6.  (C)  The GOP would welcome the U.S. meeting with Nawaz to urge him not to boycott the election,  7.  (C) Northwest Frontier Province Governor Orakzai is likely to be replaced in the next few days because of his inability to get things done and the deals he has made with the militants.  8.  (C)  There will be no new \"Emergency Rule\".  There may be isolated areas with curfews if the Army is called in to quell violence.  These will not last more than 48 to 72 hours. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/28/2007 16:40", "classification" : "SECRET//NOFORN", "body" : "S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005388  SIPDIS  SIPDIS NOFORN  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PINR, SHUM, PK, PINS SUBJECT: PAKISTAN'S NEXT PRIME MINISTER?   Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4(b)(d).  1.     (S/NF) The Pakistan Muslim League has unofficially selected former Punjab Chief Minister and current head of the party's Punjab chapter, Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi, as its candidate for the Prime Ministership following the January 2008 national elections.  Elahi, who until the November 15 dissolution of the provincial governments served as Punjab's Chief Minister, has long been a prominent figure in center-right politics in the Punjab province.  While Elahi lacks the personal charisma of other major political leaders, such as the late Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, his political instincts and organizational skills more than compensate for this deficiency.  Unlike Bhutto and Sharif, who run their parties as personal fiefdoms based on the sheer force of their personalities, Elahi and his cousin/brother-in-law Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain have a history of deal-making and coalition-building with Pakistan's center-right, that has created personal and political ties between them and most of the Punjab's feudal and industrial elite.  2.     (S/NF) Elahi first came to prominence along with his older cousin and brother-in-law Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain as supporters of center-right leader Nawaz Sharif.  As Lahore-based Kashmiris who relied primarily on the army and intelligence agencies for political elevation, the Sharifs lacked personal ties and common ground with most of Punjab's center-right politicians who hailed from the province's traditional feudal and industrial families.  The Chaudhrys, industrialists from Gujrat, were among the first to recognize the Sharifs' rising influence in center-right politics and first formed business and later political ties to the family.  For this reason, both Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat were ultimately admitted to the Sharifs' inner circle, making them arguably the second most powerful family in the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz.  The Sharifs came to rely on the Chaudhrys for much of the political strategy and deal-making that kept the coalition of Punjabi feudals and industrialists -- on which the party was based -- working in tandem (despite Nawaz Sharif's notoriously difficult personality).  3.     (S/NF) The Chaudhrys' major rift with the Sharifs came following the 1997 elections.  Nawaz Sharif had ostensibly promised Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat that, in return for engineering an election campaign that resulted in a two-thirds majority for the party in the National Assembly, Ch. Pervaiz would be made Chief Minister of the Punjab. Following the party's victory, however, Nawaz broke his word and instead elevated his brother Shahbaz to the Chief Ministerial office -- leaving Elahi as Speaker of the Provincial Assembly.  While Elahi remained loyal to Nawaz and the PML-N, the relationship between the two families never fully recovered.  Ch. Pervaiz has raised this story on more than one occasion with the Principal Officer, as evidence of Sharif's lack of trust in non-family members, and as a reason for the break between the two families following the 1999 coup.  4.     (S/NF) The decision to remain with the PML-N in 1997, despite differences with the Sharifs, was largely due to the Chaudhrys' distaste for the Bhutto family -- a rivalry that pre-dates the current generation.  The Chaudhrys hold Benazir Bhutto's father responsible for the death of Ch. Pervaiz Elahi's father and for the imprisonment and torture of Ch. Shujaat Hussain's father during the elder Bhutto's tenure as Prime Minister.  Both Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat were briefly detained by the elder Bhutto.  Ch. Shujaat's father was a close advisor to Gen. Zia-ul-Haq following his 1979 coup against Bhutto, and is believed to have encouraged Gen. Zia to have Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto executed.  Rumor in Lahore is that Ch. Shujaat's father loaned Gen. Zia his pen to sign Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto's death warrant.  Ch. Pervaiz ostensibly purchased the same pen at an auction some years later.  The Chaudhrys are believed to have actively opposed a pre-electoral deal devised between Benazir Bhutto and President Musharraf in September 2007, largely due to their personal animosity for Bhutto.  Since her death, Elahi, in conversation, has suggested that he would be able to form a solid working relationship with either of her likely successors, Amin Faheem or Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari.  ISLAMABAD 00005388  002 OF 003    5.     (S/NF) Following the 1999 coup both Ch. Pervaiz and Ch. Shujaat were detained by the National Accountability Bureau on corruption charges relating to unpaid state-owned bank loans that were made to their companies.  Charges against both were dropped following an agreement they made to defect from the Pakistan Muslim League - Nawaz and assist President Musharraf in building a new center-right Muslim League in Punjab.  The Chaudhrys are believed to have been offered this deal at the behest of National Security Council Secretary Tariq Aziz -- who they once counted as a close  SIPDIS political ally (they have since fallen out over differences relating to the award of PML tickets in 2002 and 2005, and Musharraf's negotiations with the late Benazir Bhutto).  The Chaudhrys carried out this new role in much the same manner as they had for the Sharifs, putting together a party based upon personal ties between them and other Punjabi feudals and industrialists.  While the party had no grassroots supporters, its candidates in both 2002 and 2005 performed well due to their personal influence in their local areas.  6.     (S/NF) As a reward for his political service, Ch. Pervaiz was appointed as Punjab Chief Minister following the 2002 national elections -- the post earlier denied to him by Nawaz Sharif.  By all accounts, Elahi performed exceptionally well in his role as an administrator.  He clearly defined his government's priorities (health care, education, and infrastructure development); devoted significant financial resources to these priority areas; and appointed capable, competent ministers to head these departments.  International donor agencies have certified that Elahi's government achieved significant improvements in many of the key indicators in these areas.  7.     (S/NF) Elahi and his family are not/not, however, immune from corruption.  There is little question that the family used its influence to secure and not repay substantial loans to a number of their businesses during the tenure of Nawaz Sharif.  In addition, during the Musharraf government Elahi and Shujaat regularly passed inside information on pending infrastructure developments to their children who owned property development companies, and who used this information to buy cheap land abutting pending developments and sell it at much higher prices later on.  The family equally used its influence to secure a District Nazim post in Gujrat for Shujaat's younger brother, who is regularly accused of siphoning off local development grants for his personal use with the tacit approval of his elders. Similarly, Elahi failed to take against political allies at the local or provincial level, who were accused of corruption during his time as Chief Minister.  8.     (S/NF) Elahi has been a strong supporter of President Musharraf's enlightened moderation agenda and favors swift, decisive law enforcement action against terrorists and extremist organizations.  Senior law-enforcement officials, who worked with Elahi as Chief Minister, claim that he gave clear instructions that significant resources were to be devoted to infiltrating and dismantling terrorist organizations and to monitoring and curtailing the activities of religious leaders believed to have extremist tendencies. Under his leadership, the Punjab police were successful in bringing down a number of terrorist cells in the province.  9.     (S/NF) At the same time, Elahi believes that the government must make a clear distinction between terrorists, and conservative religious figures.  While Elahi and his family are followers of moderate Sufi traditions, he has, largely for political reasons, built ties with more conservative Deobandi religious institutions, particularly the Deobandi madrassa board and the Tablighi Jamaat.  These individuals, who had been traditionally ignored by Punjab's center-right politicians (almost all of whom follow the Sufi school of through), have provided Elahi with a source of influence in these communities -- unparalleled by other main-stream politicians.  Elahi has used this influence to encourage reform within Punjab's madrassas and obtain strong statements from these leaders condemning terrorist violence and declaring its un-Islamic.  Absent the support he enjoyed in these quarters, it is doubtful that the government could have proceeded with its admittedly incomplete  ISLAMABAD 00005388  003 OF 003   religious-reform agenda.  10.    (S/NF) Elahi is a close advisor of President Musharraf, and is regularly consulted by him on political strategy.  This advice, however, is not always followed -- leading to a certain degree of tension in their relationship.  Elahi believes that if he and Shujaat had been listened to, the entire Chief Justice episode and the state of emergency could have been avoided.  If elected Prime Minister, Elahi will not content himself with the titular role played by his predecessors and will insist on full control over broad aspects of domestic policy and political strategy.  This will inevitably bring him into conflict with the President, although given their prior relationship, these issues can probably be resolved quite amicably.  11.    (S/NF) Elahi was born in 1945 and educated at Lahore's Forman Christian College and Watford College of Technology in London.  He is married with two sons.  The elder is a Sufi religious scholar, who avoids politics and public appearances.  The younger, Moonis Elahi, attended the Wharton Business School and is being groomed by his father as the family's political heir,  Moonis is contesting his first provincial assembly elections in January 2008, for seats in both Lahore and the family's base in Gujrat.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5359|07ISLAMABAD5380", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/29/2007 11:56", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005390  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, ASEC, AMGT, CASC, PINR, MARR, KFLO SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 4: BHUTTO'S FUNERAL FOLLOWED BY NIGHT OF WIDESPREAD UNREST  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5380      B. ISLAMABAD 5359  1. (U) SUMMARY.  Countrywide protests, violence and widespread arson followed the December 28 afternoon interment of Benazir Bhutto. Today has brought greater calm in many areas with most businesses closed and light traffic on the streets, but unrest continues in some cities, especially Karachi. The official three day mourning period for Bhutto concludes tomorrow, December 30, and mourners continue to descend on Larkana, the site of her ancestral home and family mausoleum.  A memorial service is scheduled for 1000 December 29 near Larkana.  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Vice Chairman Faheem told Ambassador there will be a PPP meeting tomorrow to decide the way forward on elections; personally, he supports having elections proceed as scheduled on January 8. (Note: The PPP's election decision will be taken a day earlier than we have reported and briefed.)  Embassy and Consulates Lahore and Peshawar are operating normally; Consulate Karachi continues on reduced staffing.  END SUMMARY.  GOVERNMENT SEEKS TO MAINTAIN ORDER  2. (U) Pakistan continues to grieve the death of Benazir Bhutto and many are venting their anger in public demonstrations often devolving into vandalism and arson.  The government continues to respond to the public's outrage in a steady and low-key manner, providing additional law-enforcement and military support as needed.  Chief of Army Staff Kayani and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Majid condemned Bhutto's assassination and made public statements offering condolences to her family and friends.  INITIAL RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION  3. (U) The Ambassador attended a December 29 briefing of the diplomatic corps at which the Interior Ministry presented the initial findings of the investigation into the December 27 assassination of Bhutto. (septel)  The government's announcement that Bhutto died, not from a bullet wound, but from striking her head on part of her vehicle in the midst of the attack, has received constant press coverage.  POLITICS AND ELECTIONS  4. (U) The government decided December 28 to convene a conference of all the political parties for consultations on general elections scheduled for January.  The date for such a conference not yet known.  5. (U) PPP President Makhdoom Amin Faheem told the Ambassador that PPP leadership would hold a party meeting tomorrow, December 29, in Larkana following the 10 am morning memorial service for Bhutto.  Faheem said his personal recommendation would be to hold elections as scheduled on January 8.  This decision will be taken a day earlier than we anticipated and have previously reported.  6. (U) Nawaz Sharif announced that if the government went forward with elections in January, it would destroy both the government and the country.  He called for a new caretaker government with no involvement by President Musharraf.  Nawaz visited Larkana today to pay a condolence call on the family.  7. (U) The Punjab government denied permission to Aitzaz Ahsan, currently under house detention, to attend Bhutto's funeral.  CG Lahore spoke with Ahsan today and reported that the GOP is blocking Ahsan's access to international and land phone service.  Ahsan confirmed that he is not a candidate to replace Bhutto as the PPP's leader; as a Punjabi, he would not be an appropriate leader for this Sindh-based political party.  PROTESTS  8. (U) In Karachi, the Army has deployed in two neighborhoods, the Malir and Bin Qasim (where Port Qasim is located), areas just east of the airport which are considered PPP strongholds.  Many parts of the town are silent, but CG Karachi reports continuing sporadic violence in some areas, and adds that about 20 people were killed and at least 80  ISLAMABAD 00005390  002 OF 002   wounded in past 36 hours.  Businesses remain closed following wide-spread arson and vandalism.  At least 600 vehicles have been burned and more than 20 buildings, including Karachi's Edhi Center, headquarters for Pakistan's largest welfare organization.  9. (U) CG Karachi is on reduced staffing and providing safehaven to local employees unable to return home due to unrest in the streets.  LARKANA  10. (U) CG Karachi reports that many mourners in Larkana went on a rampage after Bhutto's burial, torching stores, government buildings, a train station and numerous vehicles. Mourners chanted anti-Musharraf and anti-U.S. slogans. Grieving crowds continue to control the road between Larkana and Shikarpur, but people continue to arrive to pay their respects, many on foot because roads are either closed or impassable.  Sunday, December 30 marks the third and final day of the official mourning period for Bhutto.  SINDH PROVINCE  11. (U) The Army has taken control of the streets in many cities in Sindh, including Sukkur, Larkana, Badin, and Hyderabad.  Domestic flights, train service and bus transportation remain suspended throughout the Sindh province.  Fuel for vehicles is in short supply as stations remain closed and tankers are unable to travel the roads. Basic goods, including food, are also in increasingly short supply as blockaded roads and attacks on trucks have halted shipping for the time being.  12. (U) In Sukkur, roughly 100 government buildings and more than 20 other buildings were burned.  In Ghotki, the telephone exchange and circuit house were burned.  According to Pakistan Telecom Company Ltd, the damage to the telephone exchange has resulted in difficulties with international calls.  PESHAWAR  13. (U) CG Peshawar reports relative calm today.  A demonstration blocked roads this morning but there were no further reports of vandalism or violence.  Police are out in force, especially at major intersections.  Very few businesses are open (just small kiosks) and traffic is light.  LAHORE  14. (U) Although there were also overnight reports of vandalism and arson throughout cities in the Punjab, CG Lahore reports that Lahore is also calm today.  Businesses are closed and there is little traffic.  AMERICAN CITIZEN SERVICES  15. (U) Embassy and Consulates issued a warden's message at midnight December 29 cautioning American citizens to avoid travel to Pakistan during the official mourning period for Benazir Bhutto, which ends tomorrow December 30.  Also, the Mission has received no reports of injuries or deaths of American citizens.  Pakistan's Ministry of the Interior has advised foreign nationals to restrict their movements and avoid large gatherings.  INTERNATIONAL RESPONSES  16. (U) According to media reports, India has put its border forces on a \"high state of vigil\" and suspended cross-border bus and train links for at least a day.  17. (U) President Karzai has ordered Afghanistan's flag to be flown at half-mast in honor of Bhutto.  The flag will remain at half-mast until 0930 December 30.  Karzai met with Bhutto hours before her death and called her death \"an immense loss for Pakistan and the Muslim world.\" PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5384", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/29/2007 12:47", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005392  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/29/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, PTER, MARR, ASEC SUBJECT: INITIAL BHUTTO INVESTIGATION BRIEFED TO DIP CORPS  REF: ISLAMABAD 5384  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: At a special briefing for the diplomatic corps December 29, Interior Secretary Kamal Shah presented the GOP's \"initial findings\" from the investigation into the Bhutto assassination.  Basing his conclusions primarily on medical reports, Shah stated that Bhutto was killed by the blunt impact of her head against the vehicle's sun roof hatch where she was thrown by the suicide bomber's blast.  Based on a cell phone intercept, Shah reported that Baitullah Mehsood's al Qaeda-Pakistan was behind the assassination. All this evidence would be shared with the Bhutto family, which would be able to choose a Lahore High Court judge to lead a parallel inquiry into whether security deficiencies occurred, as has been alleged.  Shah committed to continued security support to the diplomatic legations, but requested that ambassadors defer travel to Larkana \"until things cool down.\"  RSO has followed up with Interior Secretary Kamal Shah to obtain more details on the investigation.  End summary.  \"Tragic Assassination\" ----------------------  2. (C) Interior Secretary Kamal Shah met with the diplomatic corps in Islamabad December 29 to brief the initial findings of the investigation into the December 27 assassination of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto.  He stated that this information was being provided to be helpful, not/not as a \"defense\" of GOP actions before or since the assassination.  3. (C) Shah opened by stating that the GOP \"shares the grief and sorrow of the nation,\" adding his condolences to Bhutto's family and supporters.  He reiterated President Musharraf's condemnation, in the strongest terms, of this \"tragic assassination.\"  He informed the assembled diplomats that Pakistan Army troops had been moved to Karachi and interior Sindh to maintain the peace.  4. (C) Shah noted the multiple assassination attempts/plots since 2001 against Musharraf and former Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, as well as other cabinet members and army and police officials.  He also mentioned the assassination attempt against Bhutto upon her return to Karachi on October 18.  Shah blamed al Qaeda-Pakistan, led by Baitullah Mehsood, for all these terrorist acts, including Bhutto's assassination.  (Note: The Ambassador later stated that we should keep the focus on who killed Benazir Bhutto, not just the details of the investigation.  She added that USG information confirmed the long-standing efforts of Mehsood to kill Bhutto.)  Criminal Investigation ----------------------  5. (C) Shah emphasized that the information he was providing from Pakistan's Criminal Investigation Department (CID) was preliminary.  The CID Inspector General was leading an interagency team and had requested the assistance of domestic explosive experts.  He added that Pakistan was not requesting international help at this time.  (Note: The Ambassador later offered Shah USG law enforcement assistance.)  The head of the suicide bomber had been recovered, Shah claimed, and domestic forensic experts were currently trying to reconstruct the face.  6. (C) Recounting the timeline of December 27 evening, Shah stated that the Rawalpindi rally site was enclosed and \"swept\" for explosives before the campaign event.  The estimated 15,000 people who attended the rally were all searched before entering the area, Shah claimed.  The attack happened on the road outside.  Bhutto was standing in the sun roof of her armored SUV when three shots were fired, followed by a blast.  These actions were executed by the same attacker, Shah posited.  The other SUV occupants -- PPP President Makhdoom Amin Faheem, personal aide Naheed Khan, and security chief Iftiaz Hussain, who remained inside the vehicle -- were not injured.  7. (C) Shah presented photos showing damage to the vehicle on Bhutto's left, while her blood was found only on her right.  ISLAMABAD 00005392  002 OF 003   (Note: We have some photos, and RSO will obtain more.) Bhutto did not suffer bullet wounds from the three shots, contrary to initial press reports.  These reports were \"premature.\"  Instead, she was killed by a blow (\"depressed fracture\") to her right temple by a \"blunt object.\"  Shah concluded that the blast propelled Bhutto into a latch on the sun roof hatch.  In response to the Ambassador's specific question about the discrepancy between initial reports from the scene and Shah's presentation now, Shah said the GOP's findings were principally based on the medical report from the seven doctors who attended to Bhutto at Rawalpindi General Hospital.  He said a number of early reports were conveyed to the press from onlookers at the scene but turned out to be wrong.  He added that the body was also x-rayed, but a full autopsy was not conducted at Asif Ali Zardari's (husband) insistence.  Shah said, in response to a later question, that the government had sought a full post-mortem but was rebuffed by the family.  \"Strong Piece of Evidence\" --------------------------  8. (C) Since the attack, the GOP had intercepted a call from a Mehsood cell phone to an unidentified speaker, Shah stated.  Emphasizing that sharing this information was contrary to investigative protocols and would likely leave the GOP \"blind for several days\" on Mehsood activities, the taped conversation was such a \"strong piece of evidence\" against al Qaeda that he had decided to go public.  9. (C) In this intercepted Mehsood conversation, he reportedly congratulates the unidentified speaker and asks for the names of the actual attackers.  The unidentified speaker obliges, naming two men.  Shah claimed that a pair of attackers would be consistent with al Qaeda's modus operandi: one suicide bomber (preoccupied with the detonation) and an on-the-ground guide.  Unlike previous attacks, it is believed that this suicide bomber also fired a weapon, heard on the video of the scene.  Shah speculated that this new aspect was designed to disperse the principal's security personnel.  He said that the only question that arose was why he did not have the names of the individual bombers.  Shah speculated that Mehsood had dispatched a number of potential suicide bombers.  GOP Precautions ---------------  10. (C) Shah insisted to the assembled dip corps that Bhutto had received adequate security support from the GOP, noting that no other former prime minister received such protection and that not even the protection given to a sitting prime minister could stop all attacks (i.e., the attempts against now former Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz).  11. (C) Shah further noted that Bhutto was provided by the GOP a dedicated security officer of her choosing.  In addition, her vehicle was flanked on both sides and in front by security vehicles.  In response to PPP claims that electronic jammers did not work, Shah noted that jammers only disrupt a remote signal, but are useless against a suicide bomber who manually detonates an explosive.  Parallel Judicial Inquiry -------------------------  12. (C) The Ambassador asked Shah to clarify the purpose of a parallel judicial inquiry, announced December 28.  Would it have independent investigators?  Shah responded that this inquiry, to be led by an as-yet-named Lahore High Court justice, would confirm the event's timeline and Bhutto's cause of death, as well as identify any security deficiencies.  Shah stated that he had contacted PPP security advisor Rehman Malik to relay the offer that Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, select the judge whom he wanted to lead this parallel inquiry.  Zardari had not yet responded.  13. (C) In contrast, the CID investigation would aim to arrest and prosecute the assassins and conspirators, Shah stated.  Everything briefed December 28 \"would be evidence at trial.\"  Additionally, this evidence \"will be shared, in full, with the PPP,\" Shah committed.  14. (C) Comment: RSO has followed up with Interior Secretary  ISLAMABAD 00005392  003 OF 003   Kamal Shah to get access to the assassination scene pictures and Bhutto x-rays to try to assess these GOP initial findings.  The offer to ask Zardari to name the judge who will preside over a parallel judicial inquiry is a welcome one, but it remains to be seen if this will satisfy PPP critics of the investigation.  End comment.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5380|07ISLAMABAD5390|07ISLAMABAD5392", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/30/2007 12:04", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005393  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, MARR, PINR SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 5: PPP POST-BENAZIR STRATEGY; REJECTION OF MEDICAL REPORT; DEATH IMPACTS ECONOMY  REF: A. ISLAMABAD 5392 ISLAMABAD 5390      B. ISLAMABAD 5380  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary:  Order was being restored in much of Pakistan on the last day of the 3-day mourning period in memory of Benazir Bhutto.  In Sindh and its major city of Karachi, violence and casualties continued with widespread property loss.  Shops remained closed, but airports and roads reopened.  The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) was meeting today to choose the party's successor to Benazir and formulate a post-Benazir strategy; the PPP is expected to make a public announcement on its decisions at 5 pm local (probably later).  There are growing indications that the elections will be postponed (see septel for Ambassador's conversations with NSA Tariq Aziz, PPP Vice Chairman Faheem and Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat). There was significant coverage of the investigation with many sources questioning the GOP's determination of the cause of Bhutto's death.  Baitallah Mehsood denied any involvement with the assassination, while PPP leaders, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, and Nawaz Sharif accused the GOP of mishandling the investigation.  Financial losses from the post-assassination violence are mounting, and transportation problems are exacerbating fuel and food shortages in Sindh. Analysts predict significant losses when the Karachi Stock Market reopens on Monday. Iran officially closed its border with Pakistan pending a reduction in violence. Mission Pakistan continues to operate normally, and all offices will reopen tomorrow, Monday, December 31.  We expect transportation problems may limit our locally engaged staff's ability to come to work. End summary.  PPP POST-BENAZIR STRATEGY  2. (C) The Central Executive Committee of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) was meeting today following a memorial service and the reading of Benazir's will to discuss a post-Benazir strategy.  Sources in the PPP predict that Benazir's son will be named titular head of the party, backed by his father, Asif Ali Zardari, with PPP Vice Chairman Amin Faheem controlling party operations.  This has yet to be confirmed.  The PPP will also today discuss whether to go forward with elections.  Faheem told Ambassador (septel) that the party was now leaning toward a delay in elections.  The PPP is expected to make a public statement around 5 pm local time, although we expect this will be delayed.  INVESTIGATION QUESTIONED  3. (U) Local media reports that Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan chief Baitallah Mehsood denied on December 29 that his organization had any role in the assassination of Bhutto after the Ministry of Interior (MOI) announced on December 28 that Baitallah's men had carried out the attack.  A spokesman for the group unconvincingly said that killing a woman is against their tribal customs and traditions.  4. U) MOI reiterated the GOP's pledge to the diplomatic corps (Ref A) that it is prepared to conduct an autopsy if the Bhutto's family allowed for the exhumation of Bhutto's body and made the request for an autopsy to take place.  Today's media included multiple articles that questioned or ridiculed the MOI investigation due to its changing theories--from gunshot to shrapnel to a skull fracture.  Sherry Rehman, the PPP Information Secretary, told local media that she saw the bullet wound while washing Bhutto's body in preparation for the funeral, and she accused the GOP of a cover-up. The General Secretary of Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), Iqbal Haider, demanded that the United Nations' experts should investigate the assassination in the same way it had investigated Lebanese PM Hariri's death.  Haider said that the medical report was \"concocted and ridiculous\" and that the HRCP would not accept the judicial commission of the probe as it was not independent.  5. (U) Former prime minister Nawaz Sharif met with Asif Ali Zardari, the husband of Bhutto, to offer his condolences. Prior to this meeting, Nawaz told reporters that the assassination was a result of inadequate security provided to  ISLAMABAD 00005393  002 OF 003   her by the GOP.   GOP SEEKS TO MAINTAIN ORDER  6. (U) President Musharraf ordered a crackdown on December 29 against elements involved in the looting and torching of public and private buildings following the assassination of Bhutto and directed authorities to arrest those committing these acts under the Anti-Terrorism Act.   ELECTIONS  7. (U) President Musharraf announced that he would like to see elections continue as scheduled but a final decision on the matter would be made after the political parties are consulted.  The Election Commission of Pakistan announced that it is also considering a postponement of the January 8 general elections because the security situation in some areas of the country were not conducive to hold the election.   See septel for Ambassador's conversations with NSA Tariq Aziz and Pakistan Muslim League President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain; it appears there is a consensus growing for a postponement of elections until mid-February.  ECONOMIC IMPACT  8. (U) Most businesses across Pakistan remained closed on Sunday; in Sindh Province, there were reports of mounting shortages of food, dairy, and fuel products.  Transport companies have been unable to make deliveries to wholesalers, and many shopkeepers report empty shelves.  Fuel stations are either out of gas or running very low.  Estimates of the official economic impact will begin to be compiled during the next week to account for lost property and investments. Daily wage earners, including factory workers and contractors, will be particularly hit hard due to the coupled closures for official mourning following the EID holiday closures.  Many factories simply remained closed and without public transportation, many employees are simply unable to report to work.  9. (U) Local insurance companies are expecting huge losses to be reported as a result of the violence across Pakistan, with the largest losses expected in Karachi.  Looted shops, factories, burned vehicles, and vandalized bank branches will constitute the majority of insurance claims.  Local media reports that several insurance companies fear the loss could be in the billions of dollars and could result in the collapse of some of Pakistan's twelve national insurance companies.  10. (U) While information is still being collected, early estimates provide that over 150 branches of local banks were looted, burned, or partially damaged. The continued violence has delayed the official tallies of damage to ATMs and banks.  Some bank owners report to EconOffs that they expect massive capital flight when banks reopen on Monday as looting is expected to continue.  11. (U) The Karachi Stock Exchange (KSE) is expected to reopen on Monday, and local contacts report to EconOffs that they expect the KSE 100 Index to take a major hit due to the political uncertainty.  KSE has an automatic trigger mechanism that halts trading if the overall index falls five percent by volume.   SINDH PROVINCE  12. (U) The Election Commission in Sindh reports that its offices in nine districts were torched, and basically everything within the offices was destroyed, including the ballots and ballot boxes for the January 8 elections. The Army has been deployed in 16 Sindh districts, and the Pakistan Railways has asked for the Army to patrol the tracks.  Airports and roads have reopened, but with the limited fuel supplies, flights are still limited and few vehicles are on the road.  The train service is still suspended due to damages to the tracks, and it has been  ISLAMABAD 00005393  003 OF 003   reported that it will be at least until January 5 before any repairs can be made and normal service resumes.  KARACHI  13. (U) A mob torched a parking lot of vehicles near the Financial Trade Center.  Locals report that gangs of Afghans and Pathans from North Nazimabad, armed with shovels and pickaxes, looted several local banks and stores.  Fires continue throughout the city.  Food stuffs are continuing to dwindle, especially water, due to roads blocks preventing delivery trucks from getting to certain neighborhoods.  Six people were killed in Lyari, a PPP stronghold.  LAHORE  14. (U) Lahore remains quiet.  Several prayer services for Bhutto are planned for today and are expected to remain peaceful.  Shops and petrol stations remain closed, but some stores in the more affluent areas of Lahore are quietly reopening.  Public transportation is starting to reemerge on the roadways, but the closure of the petrol stations is preventing many rickshaws from returning.  With the end of the 3-day mourning period on Monday, transport and shops are expected to reopen.  PESHAWAR  15.  (U) Peshawar CG reports that the city is quiet today.   AMERICAN CITIZEN SERVICES  16. (U) Embassy and Consulates report that no emergency ACS calls have been made.  The three Consulates also report that airports and roads have reopened in their areas, allowing flights to take place and people to travel to and from the airports more freely.   INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE  17. (U) On December 29, Iran closed its border with Pakistan for an indefinite period in view of the uncertainty in Pakistan.  Sources said the Government of Iran took the decision after the unrest in Panjgur, Turbat, Gwadar, Mand, and Taftan areas of Balochistan.  18. (U) Media reports that train service with India has been restored. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5394", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/30/2007 12:15", "classification" : "UNCLASSIFIED", "body" : "UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005394  SIPDIS  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: N/A TAGS: PREL, ECON, ETRD, EICN, EINV, PBTS, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: OPEN COMPETITION LEADS TO VERY LOW MOBILE PHONE RATES  1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Pakistan's telecommunication policy reforms earned the country USD 8.0 billion in investments over the past four years.  Promotion of open competition in the telecom industry has led to some of the lowest mobile phone rates in the world and substantially increased the average Pakistani's access to overall phone communication.  The telecom industry is an incredibly positive force in the economy and will continue to be so as long as the reforms stay in place. END SUMMARY.  Telecom Growth Engine --------------------------------------------- ------- 2. (SBU) Pakistan's telecom sector has become a major engine of economic growth as a result of the Pakistan Telecom Authority (PTA) policy reforms.  These changes lead to incredibly low mobile phone rates and USD 8.0 billion in investment by telecom companies over the past four years.  Currently, 48 percent of the population has access to some form of mobile communication service while 89 percent have access to a telephone service. Teledensity has increased from 4 percent in 2003 to 35 percent in 2007.  3. (SBU) Many government officials have extolled the telecom sector's impressive performance in press and speeches over the last year.  The Secretary of Information Technology, Farrakh Qayyum, said in a local press article that the telecom sector constitutes 2 percent of the GDP and is expected to rise to 3 percent in the next three to four years.  In a speech to the World Bank in May, former Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz said the telecom sector is a major employer of skilled jobs as its exponential growth has resulted in the creation of 80,000 jobs directly and 500,000 jobs indirectly. The government receipts from the telecom sector as taxes, dividends, and indirect revenues amount to USD 1.3 billion per year.  Very Low Mobile Rates --------------------------------------------- -------  4. (SBU) Currently, Mobilink, the largest of six mobile telecom operators in Pakistan, offers rates as low as USD 0.013/minute for outgoing calls and USD 0.016/SMS text message. Domestic and international calls via mobile phones are extremely cheap at USD 0.05/minute.  Sargana explained that the PTA monitors the rates of the Significant Market Power Players (SMPP) and ensures that SMPPs do not drop their tariff rates to a degree that would drive smaller operators out of the market.  PTA uses Mobilink as a benchmark to determine the tariff structure.  Past Monopoly and Present Open Competition --------------------------------------------- ----  5. (SBU) Mr. Arif Sargana, Director of Economic Affairs, PTA, discussed with EconOffs on Nov 27 the innovative policies.  Prior to 2003, mobile and fixed line rates were very expensive in Pakistan because then state-owned Pakistan Telecommunications Company Limited (PTCL), a government-owned enterprise, had a monopoly on all fixed line telephone services and set the tariff rates.  According to Sargana, PTCL rebuffed suggestions by the GOP to lower tariff rates and insisted that the government pay a subsidy to replace lost revenue.  In 2005 the GOP sold PTCL to the private Dubai-based telecom company Etisalat in a deal worth USD 2.57 billion.  The sale was part of the GOP's plan to privatize government-owned, money-making ventures and increase the foreign exchange reserves.  6. (SBU) Mobile services began operation in Pakistan in 1990 with only two companies, Mobilink and Ufone.  Egyptian owned Mobilink had a 70 percent market share and Ufone was owned by PTCL, which resulted in little market competition.  Most mobile phone activity was concentrated in the urban areas. Sargana credited, former PTA Chairman, retired Major General Shahzada Alam Malik, as instrumental in bringing down tariff rates.  Malik convinced the GOP to allow more mobile players into the market.  As a result, Telenor (Norwegian) and Warid (UAE) entered the market and paid USD 291 million each for an operating license from PTA.  7. (SBU) PTA decided to institute a program called Calling Party Pays (CPP) in 2001 to allow mobile operators to set their own rates for outgoing calls and SMS text messaging, said Sargana, but prohibited charges for incoming calls. CPP has given a boost to the mobile telecom sector and the market has grown at a tremendous pace - USD 2.3 million subscribers added per month.  Spurring Investment and Access --------------------------------------------- ----   ISLAMABAD 00005394  002 OF 002   8. (SBU) Part of the open market success story is PTA's structure for charging license fees of USD 291 million to telecom operators in the mobile market.  In Pakistan, mobile operators pay 50 percent of the set licensing fee in the first three to four years and the remaining 50 percent over ten year installments.  By comparison, in India, operators pay low initial licensing fees, but pay 10 percent of their annual revenues as fees to the government.  Sargana believes that the fixed rate method rather than the percentage rate method for licensing fees makes investment more attractive in Pakistan because investors earn more revenue over the long-run.  Rural Telecom Development Planned --------------------------------------------- ------  9. (SBU) PTA has programs for rural telecom development through the Universal Service Fund (USF) which has a balance of USD 83 million, Sargana said.  Over the next year PTA will help set up 400 telecenters in rural areas equipped with telephone, fax machines, scanners, and photocopiers. Approximately 40 centers were already established free of cost.  PTA also has a program collaborating with two microfinance banks to provide loans of up to USD 833 to encourage the set up of similar centers in other rural areas in addition to the offer of reduced tariffs.  10. (SBU) COMMENT: The telecom sector is a critical part of Pakistan's growth and demonstrates the potential short-term results that can be achieved through privatization and government reform. Pakistan's telecom industry is one of the most progressive sectors of the economy.  The continued potential growth and attractive investment returns appear to mitigate the political risk for foreign investors in this sector.  END COMMENT.   PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5388", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/30/2007 15:28", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005395  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/29/2017 TAGS: PREL, PGOV, PK SUBJECT: BHUTTO'S SON (AND HUSBAND) NEW PPP LEADERS; PPP SUPPORTS ELECTIONS ON TIME  REF: ISLAMABAD 5388  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, for reasons 1.4 (b)(d)  1. (C)  The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) has chosen Benazir's son, Bilawal Bhutto, to lead the party, with support from her husband, Asif Ali Zardari as a co-chair. Amin Faheem will continue as Vice Chairman and be the PPP's candidate for Prime Minister.  While Bilawal finishes his degree at Oxford, Asif Ali Zardari would lead the party, but he will not be a candidate.  Over 90% of PPP members attending today's meeting supported going forward with elections as scheduled on January 8. In a press conference, an emotional Zardari called on Nawaz Sharif to participate in elections and asked for a Hariri-type UN investigation into Bhutto's death.  2.  (C)  In separate conversations with Ambassador, NSA Aziz and Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat confirmed that the GOP would follow the PPP's wishes, but both noted logistical problems created by the post-assassination violence would make it increasingly difficult to have the election on January 8.  Shujaat and Aziz also confirmed that the idea of an international investigation into Bhutto's death had been discussed and rejected by Musharraf.  Shujaat indicated that, with the PPP under Bilawal, Zardari and Faheem, there was a good chance for PML and PPP to form a coalition government after the elections.  3.  (C)  In our view, we will need to press the government to allow some type of international review of the assassination investigation.  End Summary.  PPP Leadership --------------  4.  (C)  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Vice Chairman Amin Faheem and Senator Enver Baig called Post several times December 28 and 29 to update us on the progress of PPP party negotiations.   The final decision was that Benazir's son Bilawal Bhutto would lead the party, while her husband, Asif Ali Zardari acted as co-chair. Amin Faheem would continue as Vice Chairman and be the party's choice for Prime Minister. While Bilawal finishes his degree at Oxford, Zardari will lead the party.  Baig told Ambassador that Zardari would not stand for election, and over 90% of PPP leaders at today's meeting supported going forward with elections on January 8. After the press conference, Ambassador congratulated Faheem on the PPP's decision; he confirmed he would be the party's choice for Prime Minister.  5.  (C) Baig told Polcouns that, in her will, Benazir had named her husband Asif Ali Zardari to take over leadership of the party, but Zardari had declined urging instead that Benazir's son Bilawal (aged 19, currently enrolled at Oxford) be given the title of party chief.  The compromise was a joint chairmanship for now.  6.  (C)  Pakistan Muslim League (PML) President Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain told Ambassador that neither Zardari nor Bilawal had a college degree; therefore, neither was eligible to be a candidate for Parliament or Prime Minister.  Shujaat indicated that Zardari would not stand for election because he knows the Army would not support someone with Zardari's questionable reputation.  Elections Postponement ----------------------  7.  (C)  In a December 29 phone conversation, Tariq Aziz confirmed to the Ambassador that the government would accept whatever decision PPP made about when the elections could take place.  Aziz also confirmed press reports that several Election Commission Offices in Sindh had been burned down, printing presses are closed preventing printing of election ballots, and fuel shortages are complicating delivery of ballots which have been printed.  It would, therefore, be difficult to hold elections on January 8.  8.  (C)  In a December 29 meeting with Ambassador,  Shujaat  ISLAMABAD 00005395  002 OF 003   said that he and PML Punjab leader Pervaiz Elahi had met yesterday with President Musharraf to discuss the election situation.  Shujaat confirmed that the government will wait for PPP's decision on how to proceed but also confirmed the logistical and security problems the Election Commission now faces.  Shujaat and Elahi polled over 40 of their key party leaders; the majority in Punjab and Balochistan were prepared to go forward with elections on January 8, but those in Sindh (the site of the worst post-assassination violence) and Northwest Frontier Province supported a delay.  Shujaat said that the PPP's 40 day mourning period would end on February 5, and the Muslim holy month of Muharram would end on February 10; therefore, elections could be held on February 14, 16 or 18.  Electoral Fallout -----------------  9.  (C)  Shujaat said that Bhutto's assassination would clearly give the PPP a boost at the polls, particularly in urban Sindh and Punjab.  But he noted that voter registration was lower in urban than rural areas.  He predicted that Nawaz Sharif would again reverse himself and participate in elections if the PPP participated.  He dismissed the idea that Fazlur Rehman's Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam party would be weaker because of its record of poor governance in the Northwest Frontier Province.  Shujaat reluctantly agreed that Bhutto's assassination and a election postponement that gives Nawaz more time to campaign would undercut the PML's vote, but he remained confident the PML would get the majority necessary to form a coalition government.  10.  (C)  Shujaat said that PML relations with both Zardari and Faheem were excellent and insisted that the chances for a PPP-PML coalition government were better than they had been before Bhutto's death.  Speaking personally, Shujaat said he faced his own family's opposition to dealing with Bhutto because of their family history (Reftel).  Shujaat described Zardari as a clever man, but one who was not in good health. When he was Interior Minister under Nawaz Sharif, Shujaat personally had assisted Zardari in avoiding extradition to the UK on trumped-up narcotics charges.  Shujaat described Faheem as being honest but weak.  Shujaat said that under Bhutto, no one else in the PPP had the opportunity for much independent action, so it was perhaps premature to underestimate Faheem's leadership capabilities.  But, we would have to ask the PPP if they were willing to join a coalition with the PML.  Independent Investigation -------------------------  11.  (C)  Ambassador again raised with Aziz the need for an independent/international investigation of Bhutto's death. Aziz said he had spoken to Zardari about his decision forbidding an autopsy.  Aziz explained that autopsies were controversial, particularly for females, but Aziz said he had argued in vain with the President for an international inquiry.  12.  (C)  Shujaat confirmed that the issue had been discussed with Musharraf and that Aziz had argued for an international investigation but had been voted down.  As an alternative, Shujaat had suggested that an international team of experts be invited to receive a briefing on the GOP's findings.  In contrast to Aziz, however, Shujaat said that autopsies were perfectly normal in Pakistan in response to magistrate's order, so if the Bhutto family allowed her body to be exhumed, the government could conduct another post-mortem based on an autopsy.  13.  (C)  Comment:  None of PPP's current lineup (Zardari, Bilawal and Faheem) are likely to give the PPP strong leadership in the short-term, but the decision to keep party control in the family is not surprising.  We see two troublesome issues.  First, the decision of the PPP to go forward with elections on January 8, when it may be logistically difficult.  We expect this will be the subject of negotiations in the next few days.  The second is an international investigation, particularly now that the party has formally called for UN intervention.  The GOP will not  ISLAMABAD 00005395  003 OF 003   welcome such an investigation.  The best news is the possibility for a strong, stable PML-PPP coalition government after the elections.  PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5393", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/31/2007 12:25", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 005410  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PK, PREL, AEMR, AMGT, ASEC, CASC, KFLO, MARR SUBJECT: MGPK02: SITREP 6: CALM BEING RESTORED; ELECTION DECISION DEFERRED; STOCKS DROP  REF: ISLAMABAD 5393  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) Summary: Pakistan today slowly returned to life after three days of mourning for Benazir Bhutto.  Major cities were largely quiet December 31, with most businesses open and public transportation running.  Pakistan's Election Commission deferred to tomorrow a decision on whether elections can occur January 8.  Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Makhdoom Amin Faheem is meeting with Musharraf tonight regarding election timing.  Opposition parties, including Pakistan People's Party are committed to contesting elections on time, but there are logistical hurdles, especially in Sindh where several election offices were torched over the weekend.  Trading on the Karachi Stock Exchange has been suspended for today due to a five percent drop in trading. The GOP agreed to a Scotland Yard investigation of the Bhutto assassination, but we have no confirmation that a request has been conveyed to the U.K.  Embassy and consulates returned to regular operations.  End summary.  Calm Being Restored -------------------  2. (SBU) After three days of mourning (and violent riots), Pakistan's cities were relatively quiet December 31, with some small demonstrations randomly occurring.  CGs Peshawar and Lahore report a return to \"normalcy,\" with most shops, gas stations and other businesses open and city public transportation running.  Islamabad and Rawalpindi have been normal.  There were reports late December 31 of sporadic violence in Karachi related to rumors of attacks on the Muttahida Quami Movement's (MQM) headquarters.  National and international (to/from India) train lines are also re-opening.  Election Decision Deferred --------------------------  3. (U) Pakistan's Election Commission (ECP) postponed to January 1 a decision on whether the scheduled January 8 general elections could go forward.  It has asked for reports from provincial governments and ECP branch offices.  4. (U) Sindh's provincial election commissioner has already stated that several district offices were torched over the last three days, destroying ballot boxes and voters' lists. The printing of ballots has also been delayed.  The Sindh official doubted elections could be held on time in these areas, estimating that three weeks were needed to get back on schedule.  5. (SBU) Pakistan People's Party (PPP) decided December 30 to go forward with elections on schedule.  In light of this decision, fellow opposition Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) confirmed December 31 that it, too, will contest elections (contrary to Nawaz Sharif's publicly-stated inclinations on December 27).  Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) leader Fazlur Rehman was quoted as \"favoring a slight delay\" in elections.  Musharraf's Pakistan Muslim League party is prepared to delay elections until mid-February.  The Investigation -----------------  6. (C) Pakistan's National Security Advisor Tariq Aziz to the Ambassador December 31 that it will abide by a Bhutto family request and have Scotland Yard conduct an independent investigation of Bhutto's assassination.  However, the U.K. has not received any request so far.  The press is full of conspiracy theories.  Several home videos that purport to show various versions of the assassination are being shown on local TV.  Karachi Stock Exchange Drops ----------------------------  7. (SBU) The Karachi Stock Exchange's KSE 100 Index lost 647.9 points in heavy trading triggering the overall five percent loss threshold, which suspended trading.  Trading will resume tomorrow.  The KSE 100 index fell from 14772.08 to 14077.16 overall.  This drop is not unique in comparison  ISLAMABAD 00005410  002 OF 002   to past market reactions to other major, national crises, and the KSE 100 is still up about 40 percent for the year. PATTERSON " }
{ "_id" : "07ISLAMABAD5411", "origin" : "Embassy Islamabad", "date_time" : "12/31/2007 12:49", "classification" : "CONFIDENTIAL", "body" : "C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISLAMABAD 005411  SIPDIS  SIPDIS  E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/27/2017 TAGS: PGOV, PREL, PTER, PK SUBJECT: PAKISTAN: CODEL SPECTER MEETING WITH CHAIRMAN OF JOINT CHIEF OF STAFF  Classified By: Anne W. Patterson, Reasons 1.4 (b), (d)  1. (C) SUMMARY.  In a December 27 meeting with General Tariq Majid, Pakistan's Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Senator Arlen Specter and Representative Patrick Kennedy stressed the importance of U.S.-Pakistan military cooperation, support for Pakistan's counter-terrorism efforts, and the potential impact of recent domestic political events, especially President Musharraf's November dismissal of Pakistan's Supreme Court.  END SUMMARY.  FINDING BIN LADEN AND COMBATING MILITANTS  2. (C)  Specter asked Majid about the status of Pakistan's efforts to capture Osama bin Laden.  Majid replied that Pakistan continued to focus on locating bin Laden, agreeing that he could be in the remote Afghanistan-Pakistan border area.  Majid stressed the need for more accurate intelligence in the hunt for bin Laden, as well as the importance of integrated U.S.-Pakistan efforts to locate him.  3. (C)  Specter said that he understood Pakistan's military was experiencing increasing difficulty in exerting control over some of the tribal areas.  Majid acknowledged there were challenges but pointed out there had been many successes as well.  Majid observed that prior to 9/11 these areas had largely \"managed themselves,\" but since then government forces had increasingly extended their presence into these areas, especially the paramilitary Frontier Corps.  However, he added, these forces could not be everywhere and some areas were virtually inaccessible.  The GoP had been steadily expanding the Frontier Corps and would continue to do so. Majid also noted that nearly 100,000 troops were supporting Special Forces efforts in these areas and Pakistan had increased the number of its  border posts from 80-90 to almost 1,000.  4. (C) The discussion then turned to the deployment and sustainability of Pakistan's troops.  Majid stated that of 190 infantry units, 146 were deployed in \"hard\" areas, such as the disputed areas with India, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Baluchistan.  Majid acknowledged that Pakistan found it difficult to sustain these long-term deployments.  POSSIBLE EXPANSION OF IMET  5. (C) Kennedy praised Pakistan's close military cooperation with the U.S., a key element in the war on terror.  Majid agreed, noting that he would like to see the relationship become more broad-based, including participation injoint training and exercises.  Both Kennedy and Majid agreed the International Military Exchange Training (IMET) program had proven beneficial to both the U.S. and Pakistan, and served as a critical tool in building relationships and developing capacity.  Kennedy said he supported expanding the IMET program with Pakistan and would like to work with Majid to make this happen.  MAJID DENIES SECURITY ASSISTANCE DIVERTED BY GOP  6. (C) Kennedy raised the issue of the U.S. attaching conditions to Pakistan's use of some U.S. military assistance.  He stressed that one of the primary purposes of such conditionality was to ensure the assistance reached the Pakistan military.  Referring to Majid's earlier remarks regarding sustainability of deployed forces, Kennedy added that it was critical to ensure Pakistan,s forces received sufficient resources.  Majid, however, dismissed the suggestion that the central government was not directing all U.S. assistance to support appropriate military operations. He insisted that the funding went to support forces in the field \"indirectly.8  He added, referring to the policy the UN uses to determine compensation for countries contributing forces to UN operations, that the  U.S. should use the UN approach to improve U.S. CSF utility to compensate people hurt by collateral damage during operations against militants, provide compensatory expenses for soldiers, families, etc.  MAJID URGES PASSING OF ROZ LEGISLATION   ISLAMABAD 00005411  002 OF 003   7. (C) Kennedy observed that the struggle against extremists was not just a military one, but a political one as well. Majid agreed, saying that military action could only be one element of a successful strategy in combating militants.  He pointed to the urgent need for improved social infrastructure and economic opportunities in these areas, adding that the proposed Reconstruction Opportunity Zones (ROZs) could prove very helpful.  He expressed his hope that U.S. legislation authorizing the ROZs would soon be expedited.  PAKISTAN,S NUCLEAR ARSENAL SECURE  8. (C) Specter then raised the issue of the security of Pakistan's nuclear arsenal.  Majid responded that Pakistan engaged closely and systematically with the U.S. to ensure effective custodial controls were in place and that the National Command Authority was firmly in control of all nuclear weapons.  He added that only Pakistan's civilian leadership had authority to order use of the weapons.  9. (C) Specter asked Majid if, in his opinion, Pakistan and India could one day create a nuclear weapon-free zone on the subcontinent.  Majid said it was possible and Pakistan had already \"made the offer,\" but that India would need to take the first step toward disarmament for Pakistan to follow suit.  Majid speculated, however, that India was unlikely to do so as it had \"a more global outlook\" militarily, whereas Pakistan's primary concern was defense (from India).  10. (C) Specter shared his concerns regarding Iran's potential development of nuclear weapons and asked what Pakistan's position would be regarding military options in addressing the threat, should it arise.  Majid indicated that Pakistan had no problem with Iran developing a nuclear program for peaceful purposes and would definitely oppose any military action against Iran, saying that such action would create dangerous instability in the region.  &IRRITANTS8 TO U.S.-PAKISTAN RELATIONSHIP  11. (C) Majid then asked to make a few remarks about the U.S.-Pakistan relationship; he described it as excellent, but noted that occasionally there were some irritants, including:  -- Official U.S. statements that cast doubts on the sincerity of Pakistan's counter-terrorism efforts; -- Media reports and commentators who suggest Pakistan's nuclear weapons are not secure; -- U.S. government decisions to withhold reimbursements and to attach conditions, thus suggesting Pakistan is not a trustworthy partner; -- Criticisms of Pakistan's internal political decisions  Such comments and actions, Majid concluded, undermined the relationship and reflected a lack of understanding of Pakistan.  CODEL RAISES ISSUE OF MUSHARRAF,S ACTION AGAINST COURTS  12. (C) Specter and Kennedy thanked Majid for his frankness, but pointed out that recent political events in Pakistan, specifically Musharraf's removal of the Supreme Court and detention of the Chief Justice, had prompted serious concerns in the U.S. government regarding Pakistan's commitment to democratization.  Specter also pointed out that, while the U.S. government sometimes had internal disagreements, they did not result in dismissal of the Supreme Court.  13. (C) Majid countered that the U.S. Chief Justice was not engaged in petty political maneuvers and that the U.S. had taken 200 years to develop its current stable form of government.  Majid also observed that, in addition to engaging in partisan politics, the Supreme Court had released dangerous militants for political reasons. Sen. Specter agreed that such militants should not be at large, but pointed out that it appeared to many that Musharraf had taken action primarily to preserve his political power.  14. (C) Majid disagreed with this analysis strenuously, saying that the judiciary had reduced the government to a state of paralysis with its politically motivated decisions.  ISLAMABAD 00005411  003 OF 003   President Musharraf, he asserted, had been forced to take action.  15. (C) Majid added that some in the U.S. did not see \"the big picture\" in Pakistan, and how seemingly innocuous U.S. actions could negatively impact Pakistan and its economy, including security measures for U.S. officials in Pakistan and the issuance of travel advisories.  He said the USG needed a fuller awareness of the many issues with which Pakistan was grappling.  16. (U) This cable was drafted after the CODEL departed.  PATTERSON " }
